Real Madrid and Liverpool are two of the most successful clubs in Europe, with long records of competitive involvement and 14 European Cup wins between them, yet before they were drawn to play each other on Wednesday in this season's Champions League last 16 they had met on just one previous occasion: the 1981 final in Paris.

Liverpool won 1–0, Alan Kennedy ­popping up to supply an unexpected late winner, and the European Cup stayed in English hands for a fifth successive ­season. Aston Villa would win it the ­following year, meaning that three ­ ­English teams (the other was Nottingham Forest) shared in a period of unprecedented ­dominance by one league. The ­enormous trophy became such a frequent visitor to this country that when Phil Thompson got his hands on it he put it behind the bar at his local.

"Only for one night," the then ­Liverpool captain explained. "We had won the League Cup earlier in the season and ­actually managed to leave it on the coach overnight, so when we got home from Paris [the Liverpool secretary] Peter Robinson explained to me that as captain I was in charge of taking care of it, even if it meant taking it home. Well I didn't need telling twice. It was in a big velvet bag so I put it in the back of my Capri and went straight to the Falcon in Kirkby. That was my local, and I ran the Sunday league team there, and we moved all the trophies we'd won, and all the bottles of brown ale, and put the European Cup behind the bar. No one could believe it.

There was a queue for the 'phone. Everybody was 'phoning their mates, telling them to come down and have a look."

If those were the days before mobiles and camera phones took all the fun out of that sort of stunt, they were also the days when Liverpool's reputation as ­England's leading team in Europe was still being forged. The fans take great pride in ­chanting "We won it five times" now, but in 1981 Liverpool had only won the ­European Cup twice and Forest had matched that achievement with wins in 1979 and 1980. So there was still a competition going on between English clubs for European supremacy

Vujadin Boskov, the Real Madrid coach, suggested that Bob Paisley's players were too old, and they arrived in Paris carrying a few injuries. Kenny Dalglish was only given a 50–50 chance of playing after getting kicked on the ankle and limping out of the semi-final against ­Bayern Munich, though he was never in any doubt he would start. "I hadn't played a competitive match for six weeks before the final but I was determined to play," Dalglish said. "I passed all the fitness tests and set out for Paris. I was never going to allow lack of match practice to prevent me from playing in a European Cup final."

The goalscorer was short of match practice as well, after missing games while recovering from a broken wrist, but Kennedy was just as concerned about all the distractions surrounding the game.

"The Parc des Princes pitch wasn't in great shape because it had staged a rugby match two weeks earlier, there was a ­dispute about shirt advertising that was only sorted out just before kick-off, and there were thousands of Liverpool fans unable to buy tickets," Kennedy said. "With no one sure who would be playing you almost thought it was the wrong time to play the European Cup final. There was a lot of wrangling off the pitch that Bob Paisley wasn't happy about. He thought we should be focused on the game."

When the game finally came around Liverpool found themselves up against a couple of familiar opponents. There was the German midfielder Uli Stielike, who had played for Borussia Mönchengladbach when Liverpool won their first European Cup, in 1977. And on the wing was the late Laurie Cunningham, the former West Bromwich Albion hero who had just added the honour of becoming Real Madrid's first English signing to the distinction of being the first black player to represent England in a competitive game. The Spanish side also featured Jose Antonio Camacho and Vicente del Bosque, two players who would go on to manage both the club and their country (Del Bosque is currenly in charge of Spain having won two European Cups with Real Madrid in his time at the Bernabeu), though If there is ever a good time to face Real Madrid in a European Cup final this was possibly it. They were making their first appearance in a final since 1966 and, like the leading Italian clubs, had been largely on the sidelines for over a decade as the European Cup was first dominated by Dutch clybs, then Germans, then English.

The game was nothing to write home about, following the pattern established in the three previous finals of forgettable encounters settled by a single goal.

"It wasn't the best final in the world but it's the winning that counts," Thompson said. "It was for me anyway. I'd seen it ­happen twice before but now I was ­captain I was wondering whether I would get a turn. Winning in Paris was my greatest career moment."

Kennedy would have to say the same, even if it felt like an ordinary game at the time – "I didn't realise the full implications until later" – and even though he is happy to describe his goal as an accident. He is being too modest there, though he was able to take advantage of a lucky break and some shocking Spanish defending. His run into the box should have been checked by Rafael Garcia Cortez, only for the defender to miss ball and man, and when shooting from a narrow angle he was assisted by a goalkeeper displaying little positional sense.

Not that any of that mattered, once the ball was in the back of the net with just eight minutes left to play.

"The goalkeeper should have done ­better," Kennedy said. "But the whole thing was down to luck. I didn't even want the ball when Ray Kennedy took his throw in, I was just making a run to try and make space for someone else. But the ball hit me on the chest and dropped perfectly. The defender came in and nothing happened. I still had the ball but I didn't know whether to shoot or cross, and basically I just wellied it towards goal. It went in, and I ran behind the goal to celebrate. I think everyone was surprised, but it was the kind of thing I had dreamed about."

