The way Owen Coyle counts it, Burnley have played Premier League opposition seven times this season and won five, drawn one and lost one. That rather oversimplifies the matter, since it is Spurs rather than Burnley who face Manchester United in the Carling Cup final next month and league fixtures are never decided on penalties, but Burnley supporters are quite happy to accept their manager's logic since five Premier League wins is all that Blackburn Rovers have managed so far this season.

Perhaps that is a little unfair on Rovers, who also put both Everton and Sunderland out of the Carling Cup, so for a correct perspective one could say that Burnley have now beaten Premier League opposition as many times as Newcastle or Middlesbrough this season, and four times more than Derby managed in the whole of the last one. It is a pity their form in the Championship has slipped – before Saturday's win against Charlton, Burnley had lost five in a row to fall out of the play-off positions – because clearly they have what it takes to compete at a higher level.

"We have shown this season we are more than capable of matching Premier League teams," said Steve Thompson, scorer of two of the goals in the 3–1 win over West Bromwich Albion on Tuesday. "We've got a particularly fit bunch of boys here as well, so the extra games aren't a concern."

Burnley have already played 41 games this season and are now in the fifth round of the FA Cup, so fatigue may count against them in the run-in, though Thompson himself is not worried about burn-out."I can't use tiredness and fatigue as an excuse, I've been on the bench most of the time," he said. "I was hoping for another cup run, though, because I didn't feel a part of the Carling Cup campaign."

Thompson has his wish, and may even go on to carve a niche for himself in FA Cup history. He certainly has a quirky enough background. He would probably have left Cardiff before last season had not a bizarre injury sustained when falling off a "banana boat" on holiday delayed a transfer, and when he fell out with manager David Jones last summer he was rescued by Coyle, who remembered the 30-year-old Scotland international as a YTS trainee who used to clean his boots at Dundee United.

"I know what Steve can do, I like his attitude, and he can score goals," Coyle said. "I don't mind whether it is Arsenal or Cardiff in the next round, because we will either get another big game or a possible way into the quarter-finals, and cup runs can boost confidence."

Coyle does not know that just from BurnleyAs a player he was a member of Bruce Rioch's Bolton side that achieved giant-killing success against Everton, Arsenal, Aston Villa and others in the early 90s, the same Bolton that eventually settled comfortably in the Premier League. Tranmere Rovers almost did the same a few years later but never won promotion. Should Burnley clear that obstacle it seems reasonable to assume they might adapt quite quickly to the top flight.That, however, is too far in the future for now. Birmingham away on Saturday is next on the agenda, before Burnley even discover their fifth-round opponents. "We had a wee blip in the league but we bounced back on Saturday and now we have another big game," Coyle said. "It doesn't really matter to me which competition it is, because our attitude is always the same. We want to win. We make no claims about anything in advance, we just go out to win each and every game, and where that takes us we'll see at the end of the season."
