Fernando Torres rescued Liverpool just when they seemed certain to drop points on the same day as Chelsea to leave Manchester United unruffled at the top of the Premier League. A reshuffled team showed some of the fighting spirit that has been missing in recent weeks, twice levelling before the dramatic finish. Portsmouth should not reproach themselves too much about defeat after twice appearing to have won the game in a thrilling second half.

Rafael Benítez is not a man to do things by halves and his response to losing Steven Gerrard and going out of the FA Cup against Everton was to make six changes and alter the shape of his side. In came three central defenders and David N'Gog to make his first Premier League start in place of Torres. The Spanish striker was joined by Xabi Alonso, Dirk Kuyt and Albert Riera on a bench that looked more experienced than the team on the field.

Portsmouth had promised a fresh start – with Tony Adams, their manager, understood to have three matches to save his job – but were models of continuity by comparison. Angelos Basinas made his debut in midfield after arriving from Greece in the transfer window, and with Jermaine Pennant unavailable due to being on loan from Liverpool, Peter Crouch was the only former player capable of embarrassing Benítez.

The lanky striker had a chance to do that after only five minutes when David Nugent played the ball under his feet. Unable to summon any real power, what Crouch managed was more of a back pass to José Reina, which would not have surprised many of the Liverpool fans in the stand behind the goal. Yossi Benayoun found the side netting at the other end before Fábio Aurélio came closest to opening the scoring with a free kick that shaved the outside of David James's post. Aurélio was further out with a shot five minutes later, though the way in which Ryan Babel and N'Gog linked to create the opening suggested Benítez might be right about Liverpool's attack not being wholly dependent on Torres and Gerrard. There is still pace in the reserve front line.

For all that, neither side offered much in the way of penetration and the first half soon settled down into a midfield scrap punctuated by occasional long shots and free kicks. Portsmouth competed in the middle but lacked any threat in the final third and Liverpool were not much different, gradually losing their forward sense of direction as the game went on. Javier Mascherano brought a fingertip save from James with a powerful effort from 25 yards, while Reina found it easier to deal with an accurate but tame free kick from Basinas. Portsmouth's best chance before the interval again fell to Crouch, after the referee Howard Webb (unintentionally) and Nugent had combined to create an opening, but he rushed his shot and failed to keep it down.

