Few clubs cherish illustrious names from their past as much as Everton, who are often unkindly accused of preferring visions of yesterday to the mundane reality of the present, and Bill Kenwright bestowed the biggest compliment imaginable on Mikel Arteta last week when he said he reminded him of Alex Young.

At 26 the Spanish midfielder is far too young himself to remember the elegant striker for whom Harry Catterick paid Hearts £42,000 in 1960, and he will find record books and scraps of video ­footage frustratingly incapable of ­recreating the aura of a player special enough to be accorded a lasting nickname – the Golden Vision – by no less an authority on the glory game than Danny Blanchflower. If Arteta is somewhat puzzled by the comparison, since he is not a striker and happens to be dark rather than blond, any Evertonian could reassure him that Young was famous for being an all-round good guy as well as a regular goalscorer. The sort of player, as Blanchflower was moved to remark, that comes close to embodying perfection.

Arteta's goal against Hull last ­Saturday was described in just such glowing terms by Stuart Hall on the radio, though that was not what made the Everton ­chairman glow with pride. Kenwright was reacting to Arteta's equally stunning response to suggestions that he might be about to leave for Manchester City or Arsenal. "There might be bids but at the moment they are just rumours," he said. "I have three years on my contract and I am not thinking about leaving, so the speculation is a little tiring. I have been treated well at Everton, English clubs respect their players. I have always said I'm very proud to represent this club and I'm happy here."

Note that he did not rule out a move – he knows perfectly well what Kaká has just found out, that no club is silly enough to turn down silly money. But how many other footballers in England could express themselves so eloquently and politely while ­publicly acknowledging gratitude to their present employers?

It must have been sweeter music than Z-Cars to the Kenwright ears, particularly as Arteta is playing so well for Everton. Though Liverpool may be more celebrated for their ­Spanish ­connection, the uncapped Arteta – uncapped at ­senior level ­anyway, ­leading to Everton fans starting a campaign last year to have him adopted by England through residential qualifications – is arguably the most in-form Iberian on Merseyside at the moment.

His nearest outfield rival is his boyhood friend and team-mate Xabi Alonso, who is expected to be back from a foot injury for ­tomorrow's Anfield derby after being badly missed as a creative midfield ­influence in Liverpool's drab draw at Stoke.

Arteta's own creative influence in  midfield has been to the fore in recent weeks because Everton have been playing ­without strikers. Necessity has forced David Moyes to do what many had been urging him to do for ages: bring Arteta in from the wing and utilise his close control and distribution skills as a fulcrum in the ­middle of the field.

Although he initially played well on the wing, using his delivery and precision to send over crosses for a succession of centre-forwards from Duncan Ferguson to Yakubu, Everton often appeared to be wasting their best player's potential by keeping him out wide. When long-term injuries to Yakubu and Louis Saha forced Moyes to turn to a six-man midfield with no recognised strikers, most Everton supporters feared the worst, yet after a few weeks they are quite pleased with the transformation, even if they worry Marouane Fellaini's suspension could bring about another reshuffle.

"We have played our most effective football of the season in recent weeks," one season-ticket holder says. "That's not to say we are playing great football, but we are using the ball better than we have done, passing more quickly and finding players well, and Arteta moving inside has been at the heart of it. It's like a cut-price version of the way Manchester United played last season, with no real front men but lots of movement from everyone else."

Moyes agrees. "Mikel has done a good job and helped us play better," the Everton manager says. "I'd like to see him score more goals from open play but he sees himself as having the responsibility of not leaving us empty in the middle of the park.

"He came to us as a central midfielder but wasn't quite ready for the physicality of the Premier League. He's stronger now, more complete, and perhaps ready for central midfield. He has worked really hard at it. He's a very conscientious boy."

An all-round good egg, then, and possibly a new Everton great. All Arteta needs now, apart from maybe a goal or two tomorrow, is the memorable ­nickname.
