Dimitar Berbatov has spent the past couple of weeks claiming to be embarrassed by comparisons with Eric Cantona and for 89 minutes here you could see exactly what he meant.

The Bulgarian was ordinary and anonymous for almost the whole game, charges that could never be laid at the Frenchman's door, yet in the last minute he popped up perfectly positioned to score the winner. One of Cantona's most celebrated habits was producing a single decisive moment to alter the course of untidy struggles such as this one, so at least United's £31m striker can claim to be the heir of that tradition.

United have not lost their knack of leaving it late to win matches either, though the last-gasp nature of this ­victory coupled with the goal after 54 ­seconds that beat Wigan on ­Wednesday bookended almost three hours of ­ineffective, unrewarding attacking that seems to suggest the absent Wayne Rooney, rather than Berbatov, is the real focus of Sir Alex Ferguson's front line. Still, now they are top of the Premier League

Bolton have not scored a League goal in more than seven hours and never looked like scoring here – Kevin Davies went close towards the end but would have been pulled up for offside had his header been on target – and United picked up a record-equalling 10th ­successive clean sheet with Edwin Van der Sar having one of his more comfortable afternoons.

The story of the game, though, was that United also looked like a team that could not buy a goal. The succession of saves Cristiano Ronaldo brought from Jussi Jaaskelainen were mostly from free-kicks, and even they were not the rockets of which the winger is ­capable. Ronaldo was United's best attacking player by a distance, though his ­ability to find colleagues, or possibly his ­colleagues' inability to make the right runs, left the visitors constantly running up blind alleys.

A couple of moments midway through the second half summed United up. First, Michael Carrick released ­Ronaldo in acres of space on the left, only for the Portuguese to ignore Carlos Tevez and Darren Fletcher darting to the far post and choose instead to wait for Berbatov's leisurely arrival, by which time the chance had gone. Less than a minute later United worked the same move and this time Ronaldo tried to pick out Tevez, but put the ball yards behind him.

After 70 minutes of similar ­frustrations, Ferguson sent on the old guard and must have been ­disappointed when Paul Scholes and Ryan Giggs proved unable to make any difference. It said everything that by the final minute United were preparing to send on Danny Welbeck for Tevez, just because ­Bolton had sent on a third centre-half and Ferguson thought his height might be useful for an aerial assault in stoppage time. "He's a big lad," Ferguson said half-apologetically, after Tevez engineered the goal before the substitution could be made. "I was about to bring Tevez off, it's a new tactic. It worked at Stoke too."

It only worked here because ­Bolton were dead on their feet by the 90th minute and two of Bolton's three ­central defenders went for Tevez and got in each other's way. The Argentine striker twisted out of the challenge and found free space on the right, with the defence in no position to recover in time to ­prevent Berbatov a free header on the six- yard line.

That was hard on the always ­excellent Jaaskelainen, though not really on ­Bolton, whose only game plan had been to hang on from the word go. They nearly got away with it as well. United almost let Liverpool off the hook after their rivals dropped two points with a toothless display of their own last week at Stoke, but in the end two £30m ­strikers were the difference between the team now at the top of the table and the depleted team forced to play a loan-signing, Ariza Makukula, who had arrived from Portugal the day before the game.


The big Benfica striker provided a welcome moment of comedy in ­earning a booking for an outrageous barge on Nemanja Vidic in the first half, when he arrived even later than the stewards did when trying to eject an unwelcome pitch invader, but otherwise did nothing to suggest he will be a serious threat to defences.

