Manchester United now know what Liverpool found out twice last month. Everton are no pushovers. Like their title rivals, United were way below their best and found Everton's defensive shield hard to dismantle, yet crucially they did not concede once ahead. Indeed, they set a new record for not conceding.

The points are all that matter this weekend and this unspectacular win could still end up as one of the most significant results of the season. With Liverpool facing Chelsea today and Everton in the Cup in midweek there was no better time for United to post a seventh successive victory in the three weeks that have passed since Rafa Benítez launched his attack on Sir Alex Ferguson. Liverpool have yet to manage a single win in that period, which is one of the reasons why United are now five points clear at the top of the Premier League.

"Everton kept going, because that's what they do, and because we couldn't put the game to bed," Ferguson said. "It was a long day for us, though I thought we should have had another penalty in the second half." To no one's great ­surprise, David Moyes did not think any penalties were merited, but was not about to argue with the result. "Our energy levels were down a little bit and there were times when I would have liked a bit more up front, but United never killed us off," he said. "Looking at them close up made me drool – it was difficult to keep thinking up ways to stop them."

Ferguson had started this Glaswegian love-in by giving his old pal a generous welcome, praising Everton's resilience and describing them as the Premier League success story of the past five years, though as the visitors still have no strikers and United are back to something approaching their strongest it was not too difficult to guess how the game would pan out. The only question was how long it would take United to break Everton down.

Tim Howard made his first save after seven minutes, diving to his right to keep out a cross from Park Ji-sung that threatened to sneak in at the far post, and was kept constantly busy afterwards. The Everton goalkeeper stopped a Carlos Tévez shot at point-blank range five ­minutes later, saved again from Tévez after Cristiano Ronaldo had hit a post from the edge of the area and arched backwards to tip a dipping effort from Ronaldo over the bar just before the half-hour. Edwin van der Sar was not exactly idle at the other end – he had to be alert to Everton's occasional threat from set pieces – though a goalkeeper who last conceded a league goal in early November must have been content to watch Tim Cahill and Marouane Fellaini pitting their wits against Rio Ferdinand and Nemanja Vidic.

Ronaldo came in from the left wing in search of the ball as the deadlock continued, only to find himself as closely policed by Phil Neville as by Tony Hibbert. The winger did find Michael Carrick with a chipped pass towards the end of the first half, but though Carrick controlled the ball on his chest and unleashed a volley expertly enough, the ball flashed the wrong side of a post.

Just when Everton thought they had done enough to turn round level, or at least were congratulating themselves on coping with everything United could throw at them in the first half, the visitors were undone by quite a low blow. Mikel Arteta unintentionally caught Carrick's back leg just inside the area, the United player tumbled to the ground and Mark Halsey, with a good view and after a momentary deliberation, pointed to the spot. It must have been unintentional because even Ferguson thought so.

"I don't think he tried to, but he brought him down," the United manager said. It was hardly a trip and there is no suggestion either that Carrick dived or exaggerated his fall, but once contact was made and the player went over the referee had little option. Off target with an earlier free-kick, Ronaldo scored ­confidently from the spot to leave Moyes, who Ferguson insists is not a moaner, nursing a grievance.

Arteta had a chance to make amends with a free-kick at the start of the ­second half, yet put it closer to the Everton fans in the corner of the ground than Van der Sar's goal. Carrick had another claim for a penalty moments later, when he ran on to John O'Shea's shrewd pass and was bundled off the ball by Joleon Lescott, though it would have been even harsher than the first had it been given. "I thought they were both penalties, but you get some and you don't get ­others," Carrick said. "I'm not complaining. ­Everton made us work hard, but the win was what we wanted. There's still more to come from us."

United were more fluent once in the lead, however, and with Everton pretty much resigned to their fate there were a few signs of invention and adventure from Tevez, Ronaldo and even Dimitar Berbatov, a player so laid-back he even managed to shrug in response to a question in the match programme. The hyperactive Tévez was on the end of most attacks, shooting wide from Park's cross and bringing another save from Howard when he tried to curl the ball round him, though the danger from Everton set pieces continued and Van der Sar had to react quickly when Arteta got his next free-kick through the wall and on target.

While leading by a single goal United could never be completely comfortable, even if there was never much doubt Van der Sar would set a new English record for not conceding. Stephen Pienaar did get a shooting chance at a time when he might have preserved Steve Death's 31-year-old mark by a matter of seconds, but he skied his 72nd-minute shot and enabled Van der Sar to sail untroubled past 1,103 minutes. He finished unbeaten on 1,122 minutes, with his side setting a new Premier League milestone with 12 consecutive clean sheets. "All credit to Edwin," Ferguson said. "We've been changing the back four around all the time in the last couple of months, and that tells you a lot."

