Yossi Benayoun believes Liverpool can still come back in the title race, as long as they learn to hold on to leads and get back to winning ways against Chelsea on Sunday. Liverpool have gathered only three points from a possible nine since Rafael Benítez picked his fight with Sir Alex Ferguson and have seen Manchester United establish a lead at the top of the Premier League by winning all four of their games in the same period.

On the last two occasions Liverpool have drawn they have seen leads cancelled out by late goals, and Benayoun, scorer of the first-half opener at Wigan on Wednesday, knows they cannot let that happen against Chelsea.

"Chelsea is a very important game for us now and we have to start winning if we want to have a chance of winning the league," the Israeli winger said. "We have to try and play better and finish games off when we are winning 1-0. We will do it, I am sure. With big players like Steven Gerrard, Jamie Carragher and Fernando Torres we will turn things around because we have the quality to do so."

Benayoun is either Anfield's greatest optimist or simply too loyal to notice that of the three "big" players he mentioned, one is a defender and the other two were withdrawn before the end at the JJB stadium, along with himself. There were boos from the visitors' end when Gerrard was asked to make way after Wigan had equalised, and that is unusual. Though Benítez claimed his captain was tired one had the impression Gerrard would willingly have given his all for the seven minutes that remained.

The Liverpool supporters also realised that, with Torres off the field and Dirk Kuyt on for Benayoun, Gerrard represented their best chance of a winning goal, or at least making something happen in the final third of the pitch. It seemed odd that Liverpool should end up with Gerrard and Torres on the bench while anonymous midfielders such as Lucas Leiva, Javier Mascherano and Ryan Babel played the whole 90 minutes, but odd seems to sum up Benítez since the turn of the year. Few could understand either, after promising to restore Robbie Keane following his omission from the FA Cup tie with Everton, why Benítez sent him on for only the last six minutes when Wigan were in the ascendancy instead of using him as a like-for-like substitute when Torres came off midway through the second half, rather than sending on Albert Riera.

It was possibly to deflect attention from some uninspiring substitutions that Benítez came out with one of his most cryptic post-match press conferences to date. In actual fact the second half had not been all that crazy, and nothing in the whole evening was as daft as the Liverpool manager muttering darkly about things he did not like but could not mention.

If Benítez really thought Wigan were too physical, he should remember Liverpool opened the game with two bad fouls by Alvaro Arbeloa and Mascherano on Daniel de Ridder and Amr Zaki respectively, and ended it with an indefensible tackle by Leiva to concede the penalty. That's not even mentioning the free kick from which Wigan debutatant Hugo Rodallega almost pinched all three points.

Conversely, if Benítez believes, as suggesting, that Michael Brown should have been penalised for persistent fouling on Gerrard, then he should have had the courage to say so. He would not have been the first manager to moan about Brown's tiresome repertoire of petty fouls and sneaky shoves. Perhaps he was restrained by an awareness of how feeble it might sound. Liverpool's title challenge derailed by journeyman spoiler now at Wigan but formerly of Manchester City, Hartlepool, Portsmouth, Sheffield United, Tottenham and Fulham. Crazy.
