Three reasons for disliking the January transfer window: Andrei Arshavin, Roque Santa Cruz and Robbie Keane. Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, creeps in this petty pace from day to day, to the last syllable of recorded time.

Three reasons for supposing it might be the least worst of the available alternatives: Emile Heskey, Wilson Palacios and Craig Bellamy. All relatively straightforward moves that seem likely to benefit the buyers and raised significant cash for the sellers.

Three reasons to be cheerful: Kenwyne Jones staying with Sunderland from a sense of loyalty, Kaká preferring traditional football values to Manchester City's material world and Jermaine Pennant turning down Real Madrid for the wages at Portsmouth. And three moves you wonder about: Jimmy Bullard to Hull, Kevin Nolan to Newcastle and Pascal Chimbonda back to Spurs.

After six years we ought to be used to the window by now, except no one seems to particularly like it. Actually that's not quite true. When Rafa Benítez was asked about it on Friday, because Premier League chairmen were investigating the feasibility of unilaterally scrapping it, he said he thought it was working well and couldn't see anything wrong with it. Given the Liverpool manager's current level of contrariness that should make everyone suspicious right away.

John Williams, the Blackburn chairman, thinks the January window does more harm than good and all transfer business would be better conducted in summer. He would think that though, wouldn't he, with Mark Hughes pestering him on a daily basis over his best striker. Niall Quinn hates the January window too. "In my time here this has been the most demanding month, in fact it has surpassed all ridiculousness," the Sunderland chairman lyrically stated. Lest it be thought this is merely a confederation of relegation-threatened clubs anxious to hang on to their prize assets until the business end of the season, here is Arsène Wenger on the subject. "I do not like it, every press conference is a bore," the Arsenal manager said. "All the talk is of players who might come in rather than players who are already here, and those are the players you rely on to fight for you at this stage of the season."

Wenger is lucky, of course. Managers such as Steve Bruce and Ricky Sbragia dread the window because all the talk is of players who might move out. Unless you are Liverpool or either of the Manchester clubs, with a comfortably large squad and transfer kitty available if necessary, January is bound to be an unsettling period. Even Chelsea are feeling the pinch this year, and Harry Redknapp's famous wheeling and dealing has not gone exactly to plan.

Throw in the other destabilising effect of the mid-season window, that of managers losing their jobs around November as boards decide they would rather have someone else spending their money, and it can be seen that what looks from the outside like a busy and exciting part of the season is anything but from within. Throw in wild-card factors such as Manchester City having money to burn and Tottenham finding themselves at the wrong end of the table, and one can easily sympathise with Quinn's assertion that if football has lost the plot, scrapping the January window might be one way of restoring a degree of sanity.

Fifa have just told the Premier League that the window stays and no changes can be made without pan-European agreement, which does not count as one of the month's major surprises, though perhaps before endorsing the status quo it could have been acknowledged that the system is not perfect. The major flaw is not the madness of January but the freeze that takes place in all the other months. If the idea was to create a more level playing field, with each team sticking to the same squad for most of the season and having to look no further than its own resources if things go wrong, it has not quite panned out that way. All that has happened is that the teams with most money build bigger squads than everyone else, so that as the season progresses and injuries arrive, they have more and better resources to dip into than the financially handicapped clubs below them.

Tony Pulis made this point just before Stoke held Liverpool to a draw for the second time this season, the one at the Britannia Stadium that Benítez began with both Keane and Fernando Torres on the bench. Stoke later managed to sign James Beattie, though before January they were struggling to find players to cover injuries and suspensions.

Bolton were recently unable to name a full complement of substitutes, and sent out a centre-forward against Manchester United who only arrived from Portugal the day before. Everton ended up fielding raw teenagers in the Merseyside derby. Middlesbrough were blitzed at home by Chelsea when they sent out young reserves against the Champions League finalists. Best league in the world? There has been no discernible levelling-up effect. Rather the clubs who do not have Champions League income or the backing of wealthy owners find their hands tied as never before. Cannon-fodder is the expression that comes to mind. With the amount of money being poured into some Premier League clubs and the seriousness of the financial difficulties facing others, it is a wonder everyone has reached February without anyone being cast hopelessly adrift.

