Arsenal welcome the league leaders Liverpool to the Emirates Stadium this afternoon knowing a sixth defeat before Christmas would convince most of the need for urgent rebuilding, yet Arsène Wenger remains typically bullish about turning round the season without recourse to the transfer market.

"Technically this team still has it all," the Arsenal manager said. "I can understand the critics when they say we are not really in the race for the season, but it is part of my job to make the second half of the season better.

"I have analysed what we have done and what the other teams have done and it makes me believe we can be at the top again soon. All we need is to pass the ball better in the final third."

Some might say Arsenal do too much passing in the final third and not enough shooting at goal, while others could reasonably point out that uncharacteristic lapses in defence have cost Wenger's side this season, not to mention what appears to be a disharmonious dressing room. Yet Arsenal still retain an ability to raise their game for big matches and illustrious opponents and few would deny that when the Gunners play with confidence, as they have shown they can from time to time this season, there are not many teams capable of matching them.

"I still have faith in these players," Wenger said, understandably seeking to emphasise the positives and restore some of his team's self-belief. "I am not ready to accept that we are out of the title race yet. So many people are questioning my team because we have lost some momentum, but I know we can get it back again. I have not yet splashed the cash, as you say, but I am not scared to make a big signing when the right player becomes available. I have the money but the players I want are not there. When I say that I do not mean to suggest nobody is good enough for Arsenal, but we are not in a position where I would want to pay over £30m for one player, and even [Dimitar] Berbatov cost £31.5m. The credit crunch makes no difference. Some say we should go down the big-spending route and I think maybe, and it is only maybe, just two more players might make a difference. But there are many big spenders out there and it has been proved that money does not always guarantee success."

Liverpool can vouch for that, with one £20m striker kicking his heels on the bench after falling dramatically out of favour and the big money signing goalscorer only just back in training after a hamstring injury. With Ryan Babel and Daniel Agger constantly being linked with moves to Italy in the January transfer window and frustrated at their lack of first-team appearances, it is fair to say that Rafael Benítez has not always played the transfer market successfully. Fernando Torres was the closest thing to a sure-fire hit, with Pepe Reina and Xabi Alonso not far behind, though it is easy to pick another threesome - say Robbie Keane, Babel and Jermaine Pennant - and conclude that getting on for £40m was not particularly well spent. 

Benítez was recuperating from a kidney stones operation last week and sent out Sammy Lee on Geoffrey Boycott duty. "Rafa has moved the club forward, there's no doubt about that," the assistant manager straight-batted. "Of course it would be nice to be further ahead than we are, but we are top of the league going into Christmas and five points better off than this time last season. That's progress. You never win anything in December, but we are closer than we have been."

An unfortunate alliance between Mark Lawrenson and Steven Gerrard sent out the strongest hint earlier in the week that Keane was unhappy and would be moved on in January, though there was no chance of Lee whacking this one to the boundary when a cautious defensive prod would suffice. "I've never known a footballer who doesn't like not playing," he said. "It's not a case of having a special word with Robbie, I have words with everyone. It's a squad game now, you can't just be concerned about 11 starters. That's why we can go into games with confidence even when we don't have Torres. We haven't had him for a few weeks now, but we don't just rely on him. You have to have a plan B and then a plan C and that's what Rafa is particularly good at. You have to be adaptable and that's why you need a squad of a certain size. In any given situation the manager always knows his best team and his best formation. I see it from the inside. All the best managers pay great attention to detail, and Rafa is second to none. He's proved he can change things around on the pitch during the course of a game. He's very pro-active and it takes knowledge to do that because the opposition always have a game plan too. He knows exactly what he is doing."

So, Rafa knows and Arsène knows, or always used to know. This could be the game where Benítez finally acquires some of the respect Wenger earned through almost instant domestic success, or it could be another case of Liverpool supplying the perspiration while Arsenal provide imagination. Today's game may just be the game that establishes who knows best. 

Tottenham's Luka Modric has big targets in his first season in England. Spurs head to Newcastle today still at the wrong end of the table, despite nine wins from 14 under Harry Redknapp and Modric said: "We have a huge job on our hands. But all the players believe we can rise up the table, and to aim for the top five is realistic and will secure us European football again next season. Then, when we reach that milestone, we can push again."
