Nineteen games gone, 19 to go. And at the exact halfway point of the Premier League season, as if it were some sort of solstice tradition as predictable as lengthening days and family arguments, two of the promoted clubs appeared in the bottom three for the first time.

This is what has been missing from the season thus far. Even Hull have begun to drop as if their wings have been singed by flying too high. "I think we have been sucked in by the pretty Premier League," Phil Brown declared after the 5-1 Boxing Day rout at Manchester City. "We are not pretty by any stretch of the imagination. We need to get ugly again because we are undoubtedly in poor form and we might need five more wins."

With Stoke City and West Bromwich Albion already in relegation positions, and Hull City awaiting the visit of Aston Villa on Tuesday with a single win in 10 matches, Brown's words will be music to the ears of managers such as Gareth Southgate, Tony Adams, Gianfranco Zola and several others. Including Harry Redknapp, billed as the Tottenham saviour, yet still out of the bottom three only on goal difference. "Anyone below Aston Villa and Everton can still get sucked into a relegation battle, that's how close it all is," the Spurs manager said. "Hull could still be in trouble. They are not safe with 27 points because they could still need another 15. The Premier League this season is 14 teams fighting relegation." Redknapp's assessment of the points needed for safety is likely to be about right, though 42 was not enough to save West Ham in 2002-03. 

That being the case, and with at least three genuine relegation six-pointers taking place today at Blackburn, West Bromwich and West Ham, the overdue gravitation of the promoted teams towards the bottom end of the table is just about the only sign that something approaching normality might be about to return soon. If the first half of the season has been abnormal, with six managers departing before Christmas and two or three more looking shaky, it is due in no small part to two of the three promoted clubs dashing everyone's comfortable assumption that the Premier League is a tough nut to crack. 

Hicks from the sticks such as Hull, first time in the top flight, and Stoke, back from spending more than two decades in the lower divisions, were supposed to quickly wither and die. West Bromwich were the promoted club expected to do best, because they have the most recent experience, yet they are the ones who appear to have found the Premier League most difficult. At least Tony Mowbray's players are doing what they expected to be doing - scrapping for every point and hoping they can accumulate enough to still be in with a fighting chance in April - and at least they are not yet hopelessly adrift, though the loss of key defender Abdoulaye Méïté with a hamstring strain for up to six weeks will not help their cause.

This is not to suggest that promoted clubs ought to go back down or that anyone objects to Hull and Stoke taking points off the big teams above them. Hull, in particular, have been tremendous value and neutral spectators have loved their impudence. The promoted teams' success has caused panic among some of the more established sides. Did Roy Keane really need to jump overboard, for example? Two wins later, Sunderland were in mid-table with a caretaker manager, now a permanent appointment, being hailed as a genius.

What happened to Paul Ince at Blackburn was even more spectacular. The young manager of MK Dons did not apply for the Ewood Park job in summer, he was head-hunted. Those who accused Ince of vaulting ambition which o'erleaps itself were barking up the wrong tree. Blackburn sought him out and offered him the position. Sam Allardyce was interviewed at the time, as were other experienced and capable coaches, but Rovers wanted Ince and there was a telling exchange on the day he was appointed that revealed much about the parties involved. 

John Williams, the Rovers chairman, was sitting alongside his new manager at the inaugural press conference, fielding a question about why the club had opted for fresh-faced potential rather than a manager tried, tested and possibly tainted by experience. "We feel we are in a position to take a chance," he explained. "It's not as if we are struggling in the bottom three." At this point, Ince turned to grin at his new boss. "Not yet," he said.

Cue hilarity all round, even if the Williams laughter was a touch forced. The fact Ince could joke about such an eventuality on day one demonstrates his cast-iron confidence and natural cheerfulness. He was not expecting it to happen and, more importantly, nor was Williams. They might have finished seventh the previous season, but that, like Mark Hughes and Roque Santa Cruz's goals, was already history. 

Perhaps Williams was expecting West Brom, Stoke and Hull to make the bottom three places their own. It did not seem likely that any of that trio would set the Premier League on fire and if you can rely on at least two promoted teams going straight back down - as was the case last season - it means there is effectively only one relegation place to avoid, so future plans can be drawn up with a degree of confidence.

What happened instead was that Blackburn, Sunderland, West Ham, Newcastle and Tottenham all changed their manager, with Portsmouth losing theirs in collateral damage, while Brown, Mowbray and Tony Pulis have remained in their original positions and still look strong. All three have improved their reputations to a greater or lesser extent, while all around them has been managerial carnage. 

Imagine being in Williams' position today, for example, when Allardyce goes up against Hughes: "It would be great to get a good result against Manchester City with it being a home game. Our home fixtures are very important to get us up to that 40-point mark," said Allardyce. More pertinently, perhaps, imagine being Adams going back to Arsenal with Portsmouth, who, in midfielder Sean Davis's view, are in trouble, despite starting the day in 11th place: "We're in a relegation fight. We need to buck our ideas up," he said. "We've got 19 games left and we need to start winning. We need to get six wins on the board."

Or how about Southgate taking a Middlesbrough team short on confidence and experience to Manchester United. "We're in a tough spell and we have two options - we wither, try and walk our way out of it and hide, or we roll our sleeves up and dig in and together work our way out of it," said the Boro manager. 

None of this chaos was remotely being envisaged when Dean Windass scored the goal that sent Hull up through the play-offs. The myth that the third-placed Championship team are doomed to fail in the Premier League has been exploded and the one about the ever-increasing gulf between the top two divisions cannot be far behind. Either the Premier League is not as good as we think it is or the Championship is much better than it gets credit for. Whatever the reason, the Premier League has, unpredictably, become unpredictable. 

Of the eight games taking place today, only Fulham against Chelsea is devoid of relegation interest. Arguably, not even Fulham are safe, having two points fewer than Hull, but with Roy Hodgson having built such a strong defence, they look much safer than the dozen clubs below them. Anything can still happen, including all three promoted clubs going straight back down again. In this most topsy-turvy of seasons, that really would be a turn-up for the books.
