On a day of shocks, there were no more nasty surprises on the Lancashire coast for Liverpool, unless you count some atrocious finishing by Robbie Keane. 

As one of the season's running stories, that one is rapidly losing its shock value, although even by the standards Keane has set since his £20m move some of these misses were hard to believe. Sunday league teams would have been embarrassed. Even Preston hardly knew where to look, knowing that Fernando Torres was watching from the bench and they really ought to have been four or five goals down by half-time. Torres later came on and rounded off the victory with the easiest of tap-ins in injury time, but Keane should have put the result beyond doubt long before then.

Preston began confidently enough, with Ross Wallace forcing a save from Diego Cavalieri with a free-kick and Youl Mawéné heading the resultant corner over the bar, though once they retreated back across halfway to allow Xabi Alonso control of the midfield they began playing a dangerous game. Working patient triangles with both his wingers and occasionally the supporting full-backs Alonso pushed and probed until it seemed only a matter of time before Liverpool would break through. 

The visitors might have done better in the 12th minute when Ryan Babel was played in down the right, only to wildly overhit a cross when he had time and space to find Keane unmarked in the middle. Albert Riera showed more poise when cutting in from the opposite wing a couple of minutes later, picking out Keane with a pinpoint cross but putting so much pace on the ball the striker could not react decisively enough. 

After a couple of Steven Gerrard shots, one straight at the goalkeeper and the other deflected by defenders, Riera decided to cut out the middleman and take matters into his own hands. Receiving that ball near the goal line on the right, where he was still lurking after crossing for a corner, the winger took the ball round Calum Davidson and strolled into the area to give himself an angle before releasing a shot that surprised Andy Lonergan with its sudden ferocity. Had Babel managed anything like as decisive a finish when Jamie Carragher set him up in an almost identical position four minutes later, the tie would have been over in half an hour. 

Instead, he came up with such a limp effort even Carragher held his head in despair. Just before half-time one of Alonso's finest disguised passes split the Preston defence through the middle to leave Keane practically one on one with the goalkeeper, yet though generous defending gave him two or three separate opportunities the best he could muster was a shot that Lonergan was able to save. 

Preston produced little to trouble the Liverpool centre-backs before half-time, with only Cavalieri's evident unfamiliarity with his defenders offering a glimmer of hope for the toiling Neil Mellor and Jon Parkin. Compared to Keane's anguish on the stroke of the interval, however, those two must have felt quite comfortable. 

Presented with an open opportunity by Gerrard's run and cross from the left, Keane missed a gaping target by a distance of yards. He could have had a first-half hat-trick by doing no more than applying three finishing touches, but missed all three by ever more embarrassing margins. When, incredibly, he got a fourth gift-wrapped opportunity in front of goal in first-half stoppage time, he admitted defeat and squared the ball to the less well-placed Alonso. 

Liverpool opened the second half with a long shot from Gerrard that Lonergan tipped over and a narrow miss from the lively Riera before receiving a scare when Sean St Ledger put the ball in their net, only to see his effort disallowed for a previous foul on Carragher by Parkin. Despite the warning and a good bit of Preston pressure around the hour mark, Rafa Benítez resisted the temptation to bring on Torres until 17 minutes from the end, at a point where Preston were building up a head of steam and threatening to make Liverpool pay dearly for their early profligacy. 

Hilariously, after St Ledger had brought a close range save from Cavalieri, Torres almost hit the corner flag with his first attempt. Gerrard saw a goalbound shot blocked by St Ledger for the Premier League leaders before the end, not that Liverpool looked much like league leaders at that stage. That's the magic of the Cup for you. It can make superiority completely disappear.
