MAnchester United may not be in the same free-flowing form as Liverpool at the moment but they can still dig out victories when they need to.

This was a far from comfortable win for the side who started the evening 10 points behind the leaders and for an hour there was a doubt whether they would be able to take maximum points from the first of their games in hand. Yet at a point in the evening when Steven Gerrard might have felt like smiling for the first time in 24 hours the hitherto ineffective Dimitar Berbatov struck from close range and normal service was resumed. The debate over whether the £31.5m United paid Tottenham for the Bulgarian was money well spent has not yet been resolved but the home side created 25 chances and someone had to stick one away.

"He's a marvellous player and he took his goal very well," Sir Alex Ferguson said. "We missed a lot of chances, though, and that is a big concern. Credit to Middlesbrough, the way they played belies their league position and we had to turn to our most experienced players in the second half. We're in a good position at the turn of the year and our two remaining games in hand are both at home. I don't think Liverpool are a bigger threat than Chelsea, I think they are both the same, but it's how we do our own job that will decide the title."

Cristiano Ronaldo picked up the player of the month award for November just before kick-off and initially appeared cursed as almost all his early touches went awry, culminating in a hideously mis-hit shot when Park Ji-sung squeezed in a surprisingly good cross from the left. Ronaldo recovered sufficiently to record United's two nearest misses of the first quarter with free-kicks. When a square ball from Wayne Rooney set up what looked a certain opening goal on 22 minutes Ronaldo seemed to select the wrong foot and failed to hit a gaping target.

Seconds earlier Afonso Alves had suggested Middlesbrough had not come merely to defend, with a run and shot that Edwin van der Sar was relieved to see flash over, and Stewart Downing pulled a shot wide on the half-hour. Despite Boro's five-man midfield United were not faced with a blanket defence or opponents reluctant to cross the halfway line; they simply could not link their own attacking players well enough to break decisively past the visitors' back four.

Once again there was little effective understanding between Rooney and Berbatov in the final third. Until a stinging shot from Rooney brought a fine save from Turnbull on the stroke of the interval, in fact, United's best opportunities of the first half all fell to defenders.

Rafael da Silva shot into the side-netting after being quickly closed down by Emmanuel Pogatetz, Nemanja Vidic put a free header wide and, when Berbatov, Rooney and Ronaldo all combined to leave Michael Carrick a shooting opportunity the midfielder was denied by a brave block from David Wheater.

As the teams left the pitch for half-time Ronaldo chased Pogatetz to complain about a challenge he felt should have brought a penalty. The Boro captain objected and officials raced to separate the pair to ensure an eyeballing session did not lead to anything worse. "There was a lot of noise and finger-pointing but the referee didn't see anything untoward," Gareth Southgate said. Even so the conflict simmered all the way to the changing rooms, with Boro's bench and coaches caught up in it, and police were called to the tunnel before the teams returned.

The feud continued on the pitch, with Ronaldo fouling Pogatetz near the touchline and the Boro left-back reacting theatrically, though it was the normally meek Park who received the first booking for taking Julio Arca's legs from behind. Boro went close again when an Alves shot struck a defender and rolled wide after a strong initial run by Jérémie Aliadière.

After Boro scared United again, Tuncay Sanli missing by inches with a diving header from a cross by Matthew Bates, Ferguson lost no time in sending on Paul Scholes and Gary Neville. One substitution might have been an acknowledgement that United were not being creative or clever enough going forward, the other an admission that Boro were getting forward at will. Scholes could claim only nuisance value as his part in the goal that followed shortly. With Chris Riggott diverted by him, Wheater made a hash of dealing with Carrick's cross and ended up giving Berbatov an opportunity to volley in from near the penalty spot, a difficult chance but one accepted with aplomb.

Park should have wrapped up the points four minutes later but missed from a yard when Neville's cross to his feet appeared to have done all the work. Carrick and Park again went close in the closing minutes and, though Tuncay struck a post in the final seconds, he was ruled offside.

"We didn't get ripped apart, in fact there was a spell in the second half when we had the upper hand," Southgate said. "We didn't make the most of our good positions and never really tested the goalkeeper but it was an improvement. I hope it boosts our self-belief because it's what we do from here on in that matters." 
