Arsenal could have won this game by four or five goals, such was the extent of their superiority, yet they did not and Bolton could just as easily have nicked an equaliser before Denílson's late clincher made certain of the points. That says a lot about the home side's persistence; Bolton were outplayed to an almost embarrassing degree in the first half, yet were still in with a fighting chance until the 87th minute. And if it also hints at Arsenal's old failing of not scoring enough goals while the going is good, they now have an insurance policy called Theo Walcott.

Not that Arsène Wenger is complaining after seven goals in eight days in Lancashire to go top of the Premier League table. Arsenal have been blown off course a few times on their visits to the north west and Wenger must have wondered what he had done to deserve back-to-back trips to Blackburn and Bolton either side of a long Champions League schlep to the kickers of Kiev. The Gunners are not the delicate flowers they once were, however, and, perhaps more significantly, neither of the teams formerly managed by Mark Hughes and Sam Allardyce are as uncompromisingly physical as they used to be. 'They tried to intimidate us, but we kept our nerve,' Wenger said, for form's sake. 'We don't mind physical, it's part of the game.'

Comprehensive 4-0 victory at Ewood Park last week notwithstanding, Wenger took the precaution of leaving Walcott on the bench. Arsenal dominated the first half without him, despite Kevin Nolan opening and closing it with stinging drives that required fingertip saves from Manuel Almunia, and the home side unexpectedly scoring first.

The daft thing about Bolton taking the lead from a corner after 14 minutes was that Arsenal had already wasted half a dozen by that stage.

Bolton began as if happy to let Arsenal pass them to pieces, allowing Bacary Sagna and Gaël Clichy to get forward like wingers, and putting the ball out of play so often it was clear they preferred to defend set pieces than counter their visitors in open play. But at least Bolton can defend set pieces, a job made much easier when Cesc Fábregas wafts his corners right over the penalty area and out of play on the other side, as he did just before Bolton scored. They can score from them, too, and took full advantage when Almunia conceded a corner, Kevin Davies climbing above Kolo Touré to meet Joey O'Brien's cross with a decisive header.

Unfortunately for Bolton, going behind obliged Arsenal to raise their game. Sir Alex Ferguson said last week that only Melchester Rovers create more chances than Manchester United - at his age, he should put away the comics and take a closer look at some of his rivals. In the 12 minutes between Bolton scoring and Arsenal equalising, Denílson and Touré shot narrowly wide, Nicklas Bendtner saw a goalbound effort blocked bravely by Danny Shittu and Emmanuel Adebayor and Alex Song both hit the woodwork. The sense of inevitability when Emmanuel Eboué finally scored from Bendtner's pass was added to when Bendtner also found the net barely two minutes later, sweeping in Denílson's low cross.

It had taken Arsenal less than 15 minutes to turn around the game and, by the half-hour stage, Bolton could consider themselves lucky to still be in touch. Arsenal continued to squander good positions, if not clear-cut chances, right up to the interval. What will have concerned Wenger more was the tackle by Davies on Clichy in the closing seconds of the half, when the Bolton striker played both the ball and the man and was rightly booked.

Clichy was sent for X-rays on his shin and did not appear for the second half, which opened with a great save from Jussi Jaaskelainen to prevent Song from extending Arsenal's lead. It would have been interesting to see how Bolton reacted to going two down because, while they were a single goal behind, they did not chase the game or change their plan. They kept nine men back and only Davies up front, refusing to make things easier for Arsenal by stretching themselves and hoping Nolan or Joey O'Brien might pick off an equaliser from long range. The latter almost did just before he was substituted, then Riga - on for the ineffectual Ebi Smolarek - brought a save from Almunia.

Bolton's conservative strategy worked to the extent that Wenger sent on Walcott for the last 20 minutes. It took him a while but, three minutes from time, Walcott's gallop forward sucked in the Bolton defence, leaving Adebayor the simple task of squaring for Denílson at the far post. It was no less than Arsenal deserved, yet slightly cruel on Bolton. 'We couldn't get near them in the first half, but we were excellent in the second,' Gary Megson said. 'For a defeat, it doesn't feel too bad. We have to play like that against teams other than Arsenal.' 

