This time last week everyone was still talking about the Olympics. Uplifting and occasionally awesome as that show was, much of the action from Beijing seemed choreographed rather than chaotic. Only right at the end, when a taekwondo competitor sensationally kicked a referee, was there a brief reminder that sport can deliver raw shock and drama as well as just spectacle. 

All through the Olympics the usual football-haters were chipping away at our national sport, bemoaning its behavioural standards and managing to present striving for medals as more noble and untainted, yet the last day of the summer transfer window has just shown why running and jumping and riding and rowing will never catch on. 

Quite simply, Beijing held no surprises to compared with the one Sir Alex Ferguson must have got when he heard Spurs had accepted a bid for Dimitar Berbatov from Manchester City. It is a great pity the look on the manager's face at that moment was not beamed live around the world to an audience estimated in the billions, but part of football's undying appeal is that it requires imagination on the part of the beholder and not just observation. Only what takes place on the pitch is available for close scrutiny; backstage details such as Fergie leaping into a car and abducting Berbatov at the airport have to be cherished in the mind's eye by fans and worked into folklore for the entertainment of future generations. 

Just as cherishable in their way would have been Peter Kenyon's reaction to learning Robinho had joined City and Mark Hughes coming in from the golf course to discover a £32.5m Brazilian had been diverted his way. Kevin Keegan was furious when he concluded that Mike Ashley and Dennis Wise had been trying to sell his best players behind his back, and rightly so. Alan Curbishley was placed in the same untenable position by similarly hostile owners, but whereas the West Ham manager read the writing on the wall and opted out of an unhappy situation, Keegan has at least been able to take advantage of his massive popularity on Tyneside to make Ashley squirm.

It has been reported that Ashley has been taken aback by the attitude of the fans, which is an incredible statement in itself. It can only mean the self-made billionaire must have imagined watching games in replica shirts and being caught on television having difficulty downing a pint of fizzy lager in a plastic glass was the sort of behaviour that would endear him to Newcastle supporters above a former player and manager and card-carrying Geordie legend who all too clearly is as emotionally tied to the club as the fans themselves. 

Rule one for any Newcastle owner is to keep the fans onside. Without a major trophy in almsot 40 years, and with no conspicuous optimism coursing through Tyneside at the moment, the fans, as Glenn Roeder has just remarked, are currently the only thing great about the club. It could be argued they are the only part of the Premier League equation to have kept their side of the bargain these past 10 years or so. 

Rule two for any Newcastle owner is not to welcome back Keegan as the returning Messiah then appoint a team of London-based suits to crucify him with decisions over his head. Obvious, really, though perhaps not for an owner who thinks he could win a popularity contest against Keegan.

Rule three is when in a hole stop digging, and take the Arab money when it is offered. That is exactly what Thaksin Shinawatra has just done, making a decent profit on his investment and securing himself a role as honorary president with the blessing of Manchester City fans; yet Newcastle, too, were on the Abu Dhabi United Group's radar along with other possibly-for-sale targets including Arsenal and Liverpool. 

No business resulted because Arsenal said they would not countenance a foreign takeover, while Liverpool were temporarily unattractive as they awaited a new stadium. Newcastle would have been ideal, but the prices did not match. The City takeover cost Adug £210m for a well-supported team in a modern new stadium in a well-connected football city. Newcastle - great stadium, great fans, but bit of a way out for attracting the world's best players - might have been available for a price in the region of £400m. Apparently it did not take too long for Adug to make up their minds. Just as well, as it turned out, because they still had Robinho to buy before the transfer deadline and the opportunity to give United the fright of their lives over Berbatov. 

Now that Noel Gallagher is making jokes about United fans inadvertently boosting the City kitty every time they fill up at the petrol station and, in perhaps the biggest wet-fish-around-the-chops shock of a truly staggering week, the City fans in our pub have started revising their opinion of Cristiano Ronaldo. Now he is no longer a cheating, preening, rudeword rudeword sexual slur, but the stake that City are going to drive through the hearts of United supporters. 'If he leaves them and comes to us we'll love him for ever,' a City fan in the pub said to your correspondent. 'Well, he practically left United anyway in the summer. All he needs to do now is choose us above Real Madrid, and that shouldn't be too hard.' 

Truly, to be tired of football at the minute is to be tired of life, though it is permissable to feel a bit sorry for Everton, who have just smashed their transfer record without anyone noticing, and for their chairman, Bill Kenwright, who had to stand up at a shareholders' meeting and apologise for not being a billionaire. 

It goes without saying that everyone is feeling sorry for the happy band of brothers that used to be the Toon Army. There will be more hard luck stories by the end of the season, probably more by the end of the month, but what has happened in the past few days is not as cataclysmic as people have been trying to make out. Keegan has quit before. Phone-ins prompted by the Eastlands takeover entitled 'The Day That Football Died' would have been better aired a year ago, when Thaksin's ugly money was sponsoring the initial City revival. Ostensibly all that has happened since is that the baton has been passed to people who actually have wads of the folding stuff to spend, rather than warrants for their arrest and frozen assets in Thailand.

The gap between the haves and have nots in the Premier League possibly just got bigger, but as it was unbridgeable in the first place what is the worst that can happen? Chelsea not getting everything their own way? Liverpool and Arsenal finding it tougher to stay in the top four? Most people would applaud those developments. 

Call me pessimistic, but I don't really think Adug will be splurging £135m on landing Ronaldo anyway. Or being in an almighty rush to make City the biggest team on the planet. No one in their right mind would put Ronaldo and Robinho in the same team, because even if two slightly flaky egotists could be accommodated the sheer number of stepovers on show would put most people off.

Could it not be possible that Adug have simply done their homework and identified winding up United as a core City activity? They did let Berbatov join their rivals, after all. If they were willing to outbid Chelsea then they could have tried to outbid United as well, or at least launched a complaint over Ferguson's role in scuppering their deal.

Obviously if Kaka, Fernando Torres and Rio Ferdinand arrive in the January transfer window I will have to revise that opinion, but if Adug are going to go to that sort of expense then surely it would have made more sense to buy Manchester United outright and start from there. One gets the idea the Glazer family would not reject the idea out of hand if money really was no object. But doing the obvious thing would be a bit boring, as would pumping City so full of money and star players they become hated playground bullies rather than lovable losers. 

If Adug have understood that City can be both popular and successful by picking up more neutral support than either United or Chelsea, then fair play to them. If the object of the exercise is to promote Abu Dhabi and come across as the acceptable face of unimaginable wealth then you wouldn't necessarily want to reinvent yourself as the new Chelsea. 

Everyone seems to be getting a teeny bit over-excited here because it was Chelsea who were gazumped, forgetting that Robinho was a player Real Madrid were trying to move on and that City scattergunned a few more attacking targets as deadline day approached.

Since being dropped by Fabio Capello, Robinho was rarely central to Real's plans. The idea that Chelsea were trying to prise away one of the Bernabeu's most prized assets is a little wide of the mark; it is much more the case that Real were trying to get as much money out of Chelsea as possible, as everyone does. It is also unlikely that Roman Abramovich could have rescued the deal by bidding a little higher. Luiz Felipe Scolari seems to feel a good player was lost for want of a few more million, whereas Abramovich probably had a shrewd idea Adug would not back off. 

The point is that even had Robinho ended up at Stamford Bridge he would have been viewed as an overpriced and slightly risky capture, and there is no guarantee he will flourish at City, where Hughes can hardly be expected to be quite as simpatico to a young Brazilian as Scolari. 

City have not changed the world with one signing, but, as they were in the top four as late as Christmas last season, and have since added Robinho, Jo, Shaun Wright-Phillips, Vincent Kompany, Pablo Zabaleta and Tal Ben Haim to their squad, they must have a decent chance of a Champions League finish this time. A better chance than Tottenham, at the very least.

Liverpool and Arsenal must be quite worried. It is hard to see why anyone else should be. How can the most exciting league in the world possibly be scared of Manchester City? Even revamped and refinanced, they are still Manchester City. 

One can understand a certain resentment at the way a once working-class activity has became a roped-off area for multimillionaires.

Spending power is all that counts now, and where's the fun in that? You don't get a roar from the terraces when a chequebook is opened or a tingle of anticipation when a new chairman stretches his legs under the boardroom table. But, let's be honest, this is not new. We've been putting up with it for some time, and football seems to have survived. Owners are the new stars; get over it. Managers have had their day. 

No one is saying this is a sensible or a fair way to run things. If you want sensible and fair you can go to Germany, and almost no one from outside that country does. A time might come soon when the Premier League becomes so vertically uncompetitive that rules have to be brought in against debt or private ownership, as already happens in other countries, though before we strangle the golden goose it is as well to remember we are talking about a small corner of the entertainment industry. Not life and death.

English football's popularity might be spiralling out of control, but no one is forced to join in, even if good people such as Curbishley and Keegan are being forced out. And we are being entertained. If it's sport you're looking for, there's always the Olympics.
