Football changes with every passing season, unless you happen to be watching the early stages of the Champions League, in which case it looks so exactly the same. You begin to wonder whether you just dreamt the past 12 months after falling asleep during the second half of the Manchester United match. 

The big change this season is that managers are now about as important as club mascots. OK, Sir Alex Ferguson is still doing things his way after 22 years, Arsène Wenger remains untouchable and Luiz Felipe Scolari looks like an ideal successor to José Mourinho at Chelsea. But Rafa Benítez had his wings clipped by his owners during the summer transfer window and he's one of the lucky ones. He's in the Champions League and still in a job. The increasing tendency of transfer windows to act as gauges to check the true level of a board's support for a manager resulted in the exits of Kevin Keegan and Alan Curbishley before the season had properly started, and then Tottenham contrived to hit the bottom of the table barely a year after securing the services of one of the most highly rated managers in Europe. 

The reason is all too straightforward, as Juande Ramos has hinted. Managers are not required to manage any more, they are just employed to look confident and in control while players are being sold under their noses without being adequately replaced. Doubtless Ramos is still a good manager and will do his best to reverse the trend from silk purse to sow's ear, but no manager in the world could be expected to sanction the sale of three goalscorers - Jermain Defoe, Robbie Keane and Dimitar Berbatov - while getting in return a single Russian striker who will need time to adapt. Similarly Spurs sold Steed Malbranque, not only a fine midfield player but a case-hardened Premier League performer, and brought in the talented though delicate Luka Modric and have been playing David Bentley out of position. Now their supporters are complaining the team looks lightweight. They could have their work cut out against Steve Bruce's pie monsters this afternoon. 

Should the unthinkable happen and Spurs lose another match to unfancied opposition, the pressure on Ramos will be intensified and the fate of Martin Jol last season recalled. Yet it was not the manager's idea to keep hold of Berbatov until the last day of the transfer window, bumping up the price with the aid of Manchester City's unexpected interest but simultaneously running out of time to bring in a replacement. Spurs had all summer to sell Berbatov. They knew United wanted him, knew the player wanted to go, and knew all along that they would trade. The rest was simply about the price, and if the price includes a wholly unbargained-for visit to the relegation end of the table in addition to a few more quid in the bank account, then Spurs as sellers played their hand poorly. 

Leaving aside the unfairness to supporters and season-ticket holders of selling a star name a fortnight into a new season - no one ever considers spectators any more, even managers are royalty compared to the poor saps who pay to watch - Spurs effectively cut off their nose to spite their face. United could easily afford the extra millions for Berbatov, while Spurs plainly cannot afford to leave themselves light on strikers for the first four months of the season.

Perhaps they saw what United did with Cristiano Ronaldo and felt they, too, would not be pushed around. But Ronaldo is younger than Berbatov and tied to a much bigger contract at the club where he made his name. United are champions of Europe and can offer Champions League football every year. Spurs cannot and, after initially making his mark in the Champions League with Bayer Leverkusen, Berbatov had reached a stage in his career where he knew, as did everybody else, that offers from blue-chip Champions League clubs would not be coming along indefinitely. 

Spurs know exactly how the business works. They succeeded in signing Bentley from Blackburn despite Paul Ince's ostensible claims that the player was going nowhere, and when Berbatov began talking of United as his dream move they should have seen the writing on the wall. Ronaldo talked of a possible move to Real Madrid in similar terms, though United can make a fairly compelling case at the moment for being bigger than Real Madrid. 'We were in the right position to dismiss Real Madrid,' Ferguson has just said. Spurs are demonstrably not bigger than United. They needed to recognise their place in the food chain and act accordingly and decisively. Had United been forced to sell Ronaldo against their will, they would have not waited until the last day of the transfer window. Ferguson would have been wanting to spend the money much earlier than that. Ramos, one can only assume, simply didn't have a say. 

The moral of the story is simple. If clubs such as Spurs, West Ham and Newcastle are going to emasculate managers with continental models of scouting, signing and selling players, all the new football directors and deal-makers are going to have to get their act together and stop making such a hash if things. Otherwise the managers will be sacked. It's all very well saying Damien Comolli or Dennis Wise should pay the price for poor performances, but what changes if they do? How does it get the team up the table? Conventional football wisdom states that it is always easier to sack the manager than the board or the players, logic that looks likely to survive the advent of football directors. They may be even easier to sack, but the new guy can't change a thing until the next transfer window.

