Park Ji-Sung, a blogger commented last week, is the sort of player who uses a slide tackle to deal with a pass to feet. He turns every 50-50 challenge into a 60-40 one in the opponent's favour. In the interval between the first and second legs of Manchester United's Champions League semi-final against Barcelona, this seemed fair comment. Particularly as it was posted by a United fan who had seen enough of Park to know. He was bewildered by Sir Alex Ferguson's team selection for Camp Nou and exasperated by the performances of Park and Carlos Tevez. 

He was far from alone and when Nani's performance against Chelsea last weekend is factored in - he ran about a lot but displayed the vision and maturity of a fractious schoolboy - there could have been very few United supporters who looked at Tuesday's team sheet and thought: 'Yep, that's the side to take us to the final.'

Ferguson thought differently and was proved right on every count. His defence was again magnificent, with the much-maligned Wes Brown deputising superbly for the influential Nemanja Vidic. If that much might have been expected, or at least hoped for, the other selection gambles lit up the Manchester night. Paul Scholes scored the only goal of the two legs, in a way that Anderson, who in almost every other respect deserved a place ahead of him, could never have done. Nani put his energy and control to excellent use and had two great chances to score. Tevez, so wasteful and careless on the ball in the goalless first leg in Barcelona, returned with a masterclass in how to play without it, running himself into the ground to deny space and time to opponents.

Perhaps most surprising of all in United's 1-0 second-leg win was Park. Almost scoring a second goal, then whipping over a perfect cross for Nani; retaining possession, sticking a foot in to break up Barça attacks and not making anyone wish they were watching Ryan Giggs instead. The Sky Sports statistics made him man of the match. There is room for argument there, but it is not something anyone would have envisaged after the first leg. 

So Ferguson is in his second Champions League final after proving the theory that it is not just about the players at your disposal, it is the way you use them. Both United's previous European Cup finals have been reached by teams considered to be the apogee of their generations. Considering the calibre of players who have not been able to reach a final with United - Bryan Robson, Paul Ince, Eric Cantona, Ruud van Nistelrooy, Juán Sebastian Verón and many others, mostly goalkeepers - it seems almost sacrilegious to see the feat by this team achieved without Wayne Rooney and Ryan Giggs, and with bit-part players in Brown, Park and Nani elevated to starring roles. 

Let's hear no more about Barcelona not being at their best, because they looked pretty handy in the first leg and an attack featuring Lionel Messi, Samuel Eto'o and Thierry Henry will not play for 180 minutes against many other sides without scoring. There was little sympathy for United when they were not at their best in last year's semi-final. The difference is that last year United might have succumbed to the body blow of losing Vidic and Rooney just before their biggest game; this year they shrugged it off. Well, perhaps not quite shrugged, but they found another way to play just as effectively. 

Credit for that goes to Ferguson and his assistant Carlos Queiroz, who were not sufficiently dismayed by the first-leg performance to be panicked into making changes for the second. They could probably hear the fans grumbling, could have anticipated the 'Fergie loses plot' headlines that would have followed another inauspicious exit, but they kept faith in their players and their system and proved United can contain teams when necessary. They don't have to be the world's greatest entertainers every week and when you are playing another team of entertainers it is only sensible not to allow them to play to their strengths. If credit for 1968 went to Matt Busby, and 1999's Treble was mined from a rare seam of youthful talent, this year could belong entirely to the manager. 

Unless it belongs instead to the manager of Chelsea, who are no one's idea of great entertainers, especially since their early-season managerial switch left them with a considerable charisma deficit. They are a team assembled to reach and win Champions League finals. That is thought to be Roman Abramovich's personal goal, and there can be no other sensible explanation for adding expensive items such as Michael Ballack and Andriy Shevchenko to a side who had already won back-to-back titles. Chelsea began by thinking they would need a Champions League-standard manager, too, so after failing to land England's they went straight for the impressive communicator who had just made Porto unlikely champions of Europe in 2004.

The important thing to remember here is that José Mourinho walked into a club who had just lost their first Champions League semi-final. But for Chelsea's critical lack of boldness in the away leg against Monaco, Porto could easily have found themselves playing Claudio Ranieri's side in the 2004 final. That Chelsea dispensed with a coach who had just led them into Europe's last four is also worth noting. Mourinho's job was simply to do better and he had almost unlimited funds at his disposal. He failed. In three attempts, he went out once in the first knockout round to the eventual winners, Barcelona, and twice at the semi-final stage to Liverpool.

Rafa Benítez's Liverpool. Coached by the man who had won only the Uefa Cup, though after getting past Chelsea in 2005 with a vastly inferior team to the one he has at present, Benítez lost no time in upgrading his CV in Istanbul. If that hurt Mourinho, it was the second defeat to Liverpool that fatally undermined him in the eyes of the Stamford Bridge hierarchy. An uneasy truce patched up over the summer soon unravelled when tensions resurfaced early in the domestic season. 

At that point Avram Grant may have been only a stop-gap, an internal appointment to buy a little time and thinking space. To have arrived unheralded in mid-season and taken Chelsea to a Champions League final at the first attempt is the sort of achievement that changes everything. Just beating Liverpool allowed Grant finally to step out of Mourinho's shadow and into the sunlight, and the fact that Chelsea can go to Moscow knowing they beat Manchester United in the Premier League so recently is greatly in the Israeli's favour. 

This does not make Grant a super-coach, and certainly not a special one. It would be easy to argue that Chelsea have won nothing yet, and might not be nearly so buoyant but for John Arne Riise's last-minute aberration at Anfield (although Chelsea were still pressing right at the end and the own goal was conjured by the efforts of two of Grant's second-half substitutes). Lugubrious on the touchline and uncomfortable on camera, Grant may not be inspirational in any conventional sense. But his management skills appear first-rate. The first duty of any manager, not just a football one, is to allow the talent at your disposal to flourish. Grant has an exceptionally talented squad, and he has done just that. He has given everyone a chance and kept everyone focused. With a win in Moscow he would eclipse Ferguson and Mourinho, and, no matter how good a squad he inherited, that could not be dismissed as beginner's luck. 

Such a result would surely also persuade Didier Drogba to change his mind, Steven Gerrard-style, about playing elsewhere next season. Even if Chelsea lose, Drogba must admit he has rarely played better than in the past few weeks, pantomime-villain status or not. His affronted tone when asking how very dare Benítez call him a diver was hilarious.

If he does leave England we will miss him, but don't bank on it. Even if Chelsea are mad enough to release Drogba, he will be back in this country quicker than you can say Nicolas Anelka. Manchester United wouldn't say no...

