If everything goes to expectation this week, all four Premier League representatives will again advance to the last eight of the Champions League, Michel Platini will have something darkly uncomplimentary to say about English funding, Richard Scudamore will revive his interest in taking games around the globe, and everyone will agree that football in this country is the envy of the world.

So why are people here complaining this season's title race is the most boring for years? Over already, it is being suggested. A one-horse event. Less compelling even than Scotland's, so that far from being the most exciting in the world, the Premier League is not even the best in Britain.

The answer to that question is twofold. Liverpool have slipped away disappointingly at the top of the table, leaving Manchester United out on their own and Chelsea are most likely to finish runners-up. Again. At the same time, Aston Villa's buoyancy has diminished, so that while Martin O'Neill is still talking a good game, it is possible to envisage an unusually dreary Arsenal side taking fourth place after all. Which means that nothing will have changed. The Premier League is as predictable as ever, despite illusory signs of competitiveness before Christmas. Same champions. Same top four. Same old, same old. If Rafa Benítez is wondering why people are starting to turn against him, even though he has restored Liverpool's reputation as one of the best teams in Europe, the answer is simple. The whole country outside Old Trafford has been waiting for somebody, anybody, to knock Sir Alex Ferguson off his perch, and it appears no one is capable. Benítez has had his chance and blown it. Never mind talking about improvement, wait till United "improve" for next season by buying Karim Benzema or David Villa.

Before anyone writes in to complain that the media's obsession with the Premier League is now shrinking to just the top four positions, let me acknowledge at once that this season could have one of the most intriguing relegation battles for years, and no one in the present bottom 13 can afford to take anything for granted. For a while it appeared Hull and Stoke were sinking after good starts and that all three promoted teams might go back down. That could still happen, although Wednesday's results proved there is life and unpredictability in every contest yet, with the possible exception of those featuring a West Brom team struggling to score enough to stay up.

Yet defending the Premier League by highlighting the teams in trouble proves the point. There isn't anything nearly as absorbing going on in the top third of the table. United are too good for everyone else. Liverpool cannot make enough money to match them and Chelsea no longer have the explosive combination of pragmatic team builder and spendthrift owner that briefly caused them problems. Arsenal will almost certainly come back stronger in future seasons, though even with their new ground and London location they are not in United's financial league.

The only club that might be – at least until Roman Abramovich tires of frugality – is Manchester City, and as long as he only has City to worry about, Ferguson will feel confident about carrying on into his 70s. The Eastlands "project" will not feature in next season's Champions League, and judging by progress this season may not be significantly closer to cracking the top four this time next year. The self-proclaimed richest club on the planet, with Robinho and Wayne Bridge already on board and plans for everyone from Lionel Messi to John Terry to be targeted in the summer, are currently behind West Ham and level on points with Wigan.

It says much about the nature of competition in the Premier League when the only people able to surprise the pensionable Ferguson are foreign billionaires with money to burn. In almost every other respect the United manager's job is easier now than it was when he turned up in England in 1986 with Liverpool dominant and half his own team down the pub. The expansion of Old Trafford and constant Champions League income have seen to that, though it could also be said that in 1986 the English league was an autonomous competition, played for its own sake and capable of being won by both Liverpool and Everton, as well as Arsenal and Aston Villa, in the same decade.

It is more of a feeder league now, as indeed is the Champions League itself. It feeds everyone who can get to the trough. For while a great deal of glory and not a little money still accompany the title of European champions, the fact is that accountants are happy just to take part. The amount a club earn by winning the final is estimated at between £80m and £100m, though only one team each season hit the jackpot. Reaching this stage of the competition – that is, qualifying for the knockout stage – is worth around £35-40m, and 16 teams do that. Half will go out this week, some big names among them, almost as down on their luck as Sir Fred Goodwin. And, unlike the former RBS chief, they will all be back next year for more.

