Didier Drogba scored, Ashley Cole was booed, Michael Essien made his first appearance for six months and Alex rounded things off with one of the stranger goals of the season. Oh... and Chelsea ended up in the FA Cup semi-finals. This was another occasion when the fabled drama and romance of the competition were somewhere else. ITV might have had more luck screening a Tic Tac commercial.

Perhaps that is a little harsh on Coventry City, who tried hard without ever looking remotely in Chelsea's class, though the underdogs hardly helped themselves by conceding a soft early goal that allowed the Premier League side to take it easy. "Chelsea are good enough to make their own goals," Chris Coleman said. "They don't need any help from us. That was a bit of nerves on our part."

The Coventry manager had promised he did not want to go out of the Cup with a whimper and felt his team might be able to match their opponents if one or two of the Chelsea players had an off-day, but whimper it was and it was the City ­players who had the off-day, ­particularly the centre-back pairing of Scott Dann and Ben Turner. Dann had already had a lucky escape as early as the second minute when he let the ball bounce and saw Drogba whisk past him to shoot wide. But when he repeated the error 13 minutes later the Ivorian striker was less forgiving.

Turner put his fellow defender under pressure with a weak and misdirected clearing header, yet even so Dann had time to deal with the situation but instead allowed Drogba to push him off the ball. Once goalside the rejuvenated striker expertly rounded Keiren Westwood and scored from a narrow angle.

That goal killed the game as a contest. Leon Best put Coventry's best chance of the first half high over the bar and Chelsea came close to another goal when ­Westwood had to tip over Frank ­Lampard's 25-yard free-kick. Chelsea operated at half pace for the rest of the game, perhaps with an eye on their Champions League game in Turin on Tuesday, and felt comfortable enough to send on Essien for the last half hour, to feel his way back to match fitness after knee-­ligament surgery. According to Guus Hiddink, the Ghanaian is unlikely to start against Juventus and Nicolas Anelka is rated doubtful as well.

By that stage of the second half Coventry were pinning most of their attacking hopes on long throws from Aron Gunnarsson, rather an odd sight to behold as the tight sidelines of the Ricoh Arena necessitate a round-the-corner run-up, a bit like a high jumper approaching the bar. When Gunnarsson reached the touchline one did not quite know whether to expect a throw or a Fosbury flop, though one of his lobs was almost turned in by Clinton Morrison after 70 minutes. His next one led directly to Chelsea's second goal.

The visitors were forced to defend it with Drogba and Alex off the field receiving treatment after an accidental collision. Referee Steve Bennett waved them on as the throw came in, Michael Ballack cleared, Florent Malouda made space in the middle and found Ricardo Quaresma on the right, and when the cross came in Alex was on the end after running the length of the pitch. More bizarre still was Coleman moaning about it.

"The referee shouldn't have let them back on the pitch so quickly," he said. "He's supposed to see where the ball bounces first. But my players weren't very happy with his attitude. He was on very friendly terms with the Chelsea players and smug towards us."

Unsurprisingly, Hiddink failed to see the logic in that argument. "We scored a beautiful goal on the counter," he said. "But I do think the rule needs looking at. We were at a disadvantage, having to defend a throw with two of our tallest players off the field. Referees should be able to wait until the teams are equal."

On this evidence, even Coleman must accept that might be a very long wait.
