Curry goat cricket, he called it. Ludlow, whose car shuttled disgruntled Englishmen between uptown Kingston and Sabina Park, rocked back his head and laughed. The sort you play at the weekend. Curry goat on the stove, peas and rice in the pot, bottles of rum on the go, get in, get out, nobody cares.
Sounds fun, except Ludlow was not offering an invite for an unexpectedly free Sunday. He was recounting what passed for England’s second innings in the first Test in Jamaica. The millionaires of the Indian Premier League played, he said, like it was curry goat cricket; as if nobody possessed the motivation to dig in and stick around. And, despite his jovial mask, he was deadly serious.
The IPL is showbusiness, but Test cricket is about substance. Andrew Flintoff may have been thunder-faced in the lobby of the team hotel on Saturday night, but that afternoon, as the only batsman that lasted long enough to build an innings, he had got out to a soft shot revealing much about the psychological roots of England’s collapse.
 
Monty Panesar was England’s not out batsman, while Flintoff could not even salvage that sliver of pride to take to Antigua this week. When it became clear that England were accelerating to defeat, nobody realigned to claim tiny consolation victories: to be the last man standing, or to make West Indies pad up and bat again, even if they were merely chasing double figures. The curry goat cricketers trooped back to the pavilion, one by one, shorn of the personal responsibility that was touted as the cornerstone of Andrew Strauss’s regime.
 
The new captain had hammered home his creed in the build-up to this Test, but if there has ever been a group of players looking for strong leadership and guidance, it is this one. Even Manchester United went off the boil when they thought Sir Alex Ferguson was leaving at the end of the 2004-05 season, and England’s Test cricketers are currently marshalled by Andy Flower, an assistant coach, who has already ruled himself out of the running for the main job.
Peter Moores, the previous coach, was deposed after clashing with Kevin Pietersen and, while his confrontational style with players may have been misjudged, there is complacency around this England team that increasingly outweighs the benefits of consistency. The best international sides are as hard to get out of as they are to get into, but the case for change after the debacle in Kingston is irrefutable. Ian Bell has an average of 19.4 since making 199 at Lord’s last year; the last century scored by Alastair Cook was in Sri Lanka in December 2007.
Jerome Taylor bowled brilliantly for West Indies, make no mistake of that, but it is an inescapable fact that the previous innings had stretched to 157.4 overs, and England were required to bat onexactly the same track 10 minutes, not 10 days, later. 
Nothing changed, except in the minds of the batsmen. Brendan Nash, the first white man to play for West Indies in 36 years, was mocked for the slowness of his innings on Friday afternoon, but how England could have done with that stickability a day later.
Chris Gayle, the West Indies captain, said that if England lose two early wickets a collapse is always a possibility and while that may also be said of many Test teams, England have shown an early vulnerability on this tour that will be hard to live down.
 
When England last imploded in this fashion in the Caribbean, for 46 in Trinidad 15 years ago, the batsmen were trapped on a difficult pitch for a final hour of play, with Courtney Walsh at one end and Curtly Ambrose at the other. Mike Atherton, the captain, returned to the dressing-room after one ball and spent the remaining time screaming his impotent frustration into a towel clutched to his face as eight wickets fell.

This was not like that. Middle of a bright day, just before lunch, against a team that had won two Tests in 30, on a flat wicket, unhelpful for bowlers. There was no excuse: but that does not mean nothing else is wrong with England.
The greatest managers, in all sports, sweat the small stuff. Sir Clive Woodward built England’s rugby World Cup victory on minutiae and attention to the finest details is one of the secrets of Ferguson’s success at Manchester United.
Yet, reverse that, and chip away at the performance level of a team by degrees, five per cent each time. No permanent coach, the distraction of the IPL, the fall-out from Pietersen’s removal as captain. 
It still does not explain why a bowler such as Taylor, delivering straight and full on a flat track, should suddenly provoke such crisis, or why Sulieman Benn got more from the surface than Panesar, but none of it helps.
 
‘There could be a compound effect,’ Flowers admitted as he searched for answers yesterday, ‘but that does not alter the fact that sportsmen have to deal with what they are given.’
What England were given in Jamaica was a lesson in the ethos of personal responsibility from the unlikeliest quarter. This group must now respond to that in Antigua, in a Test that begins, ominously on Friday the 13th. If they do not, apart from to the world of dancing shows and Indian dancing bears, where is there for England’s curry goat cricketers to go?
