The reason Andrei Arshavin could complete his transfer to Arsenal almost 24 hours after the deadline expired is that the Premier League are facilitators, more than
regulators.

That much became clear the day Richard Scudamore, the chief executive, explained what would have happened had West Ham United told the truth at the time about the illegal third party agreements governing the transfers of Carlos Tevez and Javier
Mascherano. In a nutshell: nothing.
Astonishing, really, considering the fall-out that followed, and all the more remarkable that so little has changed since, but according to Scudamore the vast majority of 
transfers concerning foreign players come with paperwork that does not conform to Premier League standards.

The policy when this happens is to wave the transfer through anyway and meet at the earliest opportunity so that Premier League lawyers can go through the contract, knocking out or re-wording unacceptable clauses. 

Scudamore says that had West Ham come clean over Tevez and Mascherano, the registrations would have been processed and the contents of their personal terms subsequently adjusted, point by point. This is no case for clemency. West Ham lied to the Premier League and judgment has to be based on real, not hypothetical, events.

Yet, clearly, the old flaws remain. The Premier League allowed the transfer of Arshavin to progress and filled in the blanks later. And the reason there has been little complaint is that, deep down, all clubs want this laissez-faire regulation, even those that shout loudest about injustice.

Premier League administrators could play hardball and implement a rule book that tied clubs to the letter of the law; but as the League is as good as controlled by club chairmen, there is no drive to introduce strict legislation. Chairmen and owners want a
regulator that helps them do business, rather than one handing out speeding tickets; yet they always reserve the right to storm to the high moral ground if disadvantaged.

This double standard permeates all leagues and football administration in England, so that the Football Association has written to the clubs involved in the Matthew Spring affair for explanation, as if transfer regulation is now a debating forum.

There is no black and white these days, just a Dulux wallchart of grey, so even the firm concept of a transfer deadline is blurred. 

‘We do things the right way,’ insisted Ivan Gazidis, chief executive of Arsenal. Not exactly. The Arshavin transfer was done the Premier League way. And that is not the same thing at all

