As AC Milan continue their battle to extricate David Beckham from his commitments in America, the common perception is that there is only one man to blame for this horrid state of affairs: the long-suffering patsy of English football, Steve McClaren.
It dates back to a conversation McClaren had with Beckham (or one of Beckham’s people, because the modern footballer tends to have staff for errands such as speaking to the national team coach) before making the decision to go to Hollywood.

Beckham, or his surrogate, asked McClaren, then England manager, if there was any chance of a return to the England fold; McClaren said there was not.
The popular version has Beckham quietly replacing the receiver and, with tears in his eyes, accepting the fact that his career as a top-class player is at an end before heading off to the knacker’s yard known as Major League Soccer, with only a new contract equivalent to the Gross Domestic Product of Tonga to console him.
It is, therefore, McClaren who is responsible for such a fine player being stranded in a minor league, instead of claiming a new contract with AC Milan; not to mention denying him the caps that would have long ago outstripped Bobby Moore’s international record for England, with starting appearances, too, not second-half cameos.
The problem with this denouncement is that it fails to take into account one simple fact: that Beckham must have thought he had shot it, too. If he had not, then, knowing him, he could not have been forced on to the plane to Los Angeles at gunpoint. 
Beckham is defined by a desire to prove his critics wrong. If questioned, he is consumed by a drive to succeed and then smile sweetly at the doubters from behind another milestone of achievement.

It does not follow that decamping to an inferior league was the default response to rejection by McClaren. Beckham’s trademark style would be to tell one of his people to get back on that telephone and find the biggest, flashest club in the market for a superstar and advise them to call a press conference for the weekend.
Slinking away to LA Galaxy was an admission of defeat; perhaps the only one Beckham has made in his career.
Beckham won, in the end, almost by accident, because McClaren’s England fell apart so rapidly. But how he must regret that loss of faith after his resurgence at AC Milan, even if he appears to have again made a greater impact on his career than on the fortunes of his team, who have drawn as many games as they have won since his arrival.
