England's cricketers are unmanageable, we have been told. Not in the conventional sense, anyway. The captain is too influential, the selectors too important.
There is no way a football-style boss could have the final say on team selection, according to the chiefs of the England and Wales Cricket Board.
Plus, the sport has no equivalent of Fabio Capello, no single figure who could walk into a dressing room and command instant respect. 
And yet, as the ECB continues to come to terms with the tumultuous fall-out from the conflict between Kevin Pietersen, the former captain, and Peter Moores, his former coach, there is also the sense of a sport clinging to methods that have been in place for a hundred years when now there is opportunity for change.
 
The ECB’s arguments cannot be casually dismissed, but Sir Clive Woodward did not win a World Cup by sticking to convention. Nor did Sir Alf Ramsey. The orthodox was challenged, obstacles removed, within their worlds these men created a new approach to the concept of winning.
So, say a cricket manager could be identified. How might that work?
Clearly, nobody would give a man watching from a dressing-room balcony the call over the captain once play is under way. Duncan Fletcher and Nasser Hussain were a fine example of how the coach-captain relationship should operate. They were close, but there were boundaries of influence and these would stay unchanged. 
A manager with selection powers is the main ECB sticking point, but is that logical? Hugh Morris, the managing director, and Geoff Miller, national selector, talk as if it is unthinkable, but why not with a careful structure?
Unlike an international football coach, the manager of England’s cricketers would spend something like 250 days with his team. The argument proceeds that he would have no time for scouting, so would make decisions on players he has not seen. Yet is that the case?
They make recommendations or are sent out on specific missions. Is that so different to what happens now? All that changes is the random nature of national selection; the fact that, as it is, England’s team management may be responding to the choices of men who do not share their collective vision. 
And we live in a world of the television replay. Is it not beyond a cricket manager to retire to his room with a DVD to study a player, the way all coaches now research the opposition? If English cricket has a fault it is an absence of direction. Morris talks of appointing a performance director, but that is just a fancy word for coach, unless the man is given real responsibility to steer English cricket.
We have good men, like Hussain or Mike Atherton, but too many are lost to television and the media. 
There are also powerful figures from beyond this country whose presence in the dressing room might have a Capello-like effect: think, for instance, of Steve Waugh of Australia. Nobody wants a manager barking orders from the wrong side of the boundary, but is it so bizarre that the blueprint for the England team is the vision of one man; who picks, who coaches, who delegates as he sees fit?
It is 132 years since England’s first Test match. Has it all gone so right that we have no appetite for change?
