The dread news that Odgers Ray and Berndtson, an executive search company, have been appointed by Hugh Morris, managing director of the England and Wales Cricket Board, to appoint England's team director for the Ashes, was beaten only by the follow-up announcement that Odgers will consult 38 advisers, including players past and present, before reaching their decision. 

The main beneficiary here is Morris (below right), who will be able to say that all views were represented in the decision, spreading the blame if the new man is a dud. 

Meanwhile, Giles Clarke, the ECB chairman, was deftly ducking a few bouncers in his first public appearance since the Allen Stanford debacle. The Kevin Pietersen-Peter Moores affair? One for Hugh Morris. Pietersen's sacking? Ask Hugh. Andrew Flintoff and the IPL? Morris and Geoff Miller, the national selector, are handling that one. What if Flintoff returns injured? Clarke has strong views, apparently, and had expressed them to - you've guessed it - Hugh Morris.
 
The ECB hardly have their recruitment agents on an exclusive leash, either. Odgers website shows eight pages of executive positions being filled under their supervision right now, everything from Dean of Medicine at the Aga Khan University in Karachi, Pakistan, to the Chief Executive of Thurrock Council, the Chief Crown Prosecutor for Hertfordshire and the Commercial Director of easyJet. The Football Association and the London 2012 Olympics have claims on their time, too. 

The ECB application closes on March 6 and among the attributes required are computer skills. This is presumably before the 38 have filled in their questionnaire on what is most vital: accurate typing or the ability to work out that a team 300 runs ahead probably does not require the services of a night watchman? 

The successful candidate will then report to Morris, and Morris will no doubt report to Clarke, but one cannot help but think that for all of this smart professional activity, what seems to be happening at the ECB right now is a very grand, very expensive game of pass the buck.
