There are currently 65 footballers playing in England who have missed an out of competition drugs test on the three strikes rule, 53 professionals and 12 youth players. 
Each has failed to be present for a single visit from the testers and would have to be absent on two further occasions to incur a ban but, even so, that is a reasonable 
number considering the figures date from January 2007. In the time since the Football Association started totting up absentees between two and three footballers each month have recorded missed tests. 

The silver lining is that there would seem no great propensity for re-offence. There was an individual who missed two tests, but he was a youth player and has subsequently left professional football. The Football Association are quietly satisfied with the statistics so far, calling them an effective deterrent. 

If they had a long list of repeat absconders they would be worried; if they had single truants in the hundreds they would be mortified; they believe that this shows players are getting the message: in this country, at least. 
Over in Belgium a legal case is brewing that could render the fight against drugs redundant. This concerns another group of 65, in this instance Belgian sportsmen and women, including athletes, cyclists, footballers and volleyball players, who have asked a court to make a judgement on the whereabouts rule, to see if it contravenes European Union privacy laws. If they are successful, the game is up. 

It is not true that there are no famous Belgians, more that the Belgians who are famous do not get that way by staying home. Audrey Hepburn, for instance, was born in Brussels. The saxophone, the internal combustion engine and asphalt were all invented by Belgians, but not in Belgium, and a Belgian priest, Father Damien, will be canonised this year for work he did with lepers on the island of Molokai, in Hawaii. Only when he died of the same illness was his body flown back to Belgium. Well, most of it, anyway.


The whereabouts rule is the central plank of legislation against performance- enhancing drugs in sport. It states that athletes have to provide anti-doping authorities 
with advance notice of their movements for a specific period of one hour each day between 6am and 11pm. Without it, testers would be unable to subject athletes to no notice, out-of-competition testing and would be reduced only to prearranged appointments or competition testing, in both cases events when the athlete would have prior knowledge of the commitment and ample time to prepare. 
The legal challenge being made by the 65 will appear in the Belgian council of state high court. Cited are items from the Belgian constitution, the European Convention of Human Rights and the Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe. It could take six months to decide and, even if unsuccessful, is likely to be followed by a second privacy case brought by FIFPro, the umbrella group of global footballers’ unions. If either ruling goes in favour, it could prove disastrous for the World Anti-Doping Agency.
Of the last seven men to win the Olympic gold medal over 100 metres, four have recorded positive tests (and another is implicated in a significant drugs scandal), but only one of those tests came at what would be termed a major meeting. That is why the whereabouts rule is so significant. It is too easy these days for an athlete to enter a doping programme tailored to a specific big race. 

Remove the possibility of surprise, out-of-competition testing and the WADA would be a toothless-tiger. Imagine having to meet an athlete on an agreed date, at an agreed time, to ascertain if a competitor was using drugs. What is wrong with this picture? Put
another way: how many felons do you think the police would apprehend if every dawn raid had to take place by appointment? ‘Not here again is he, madam? Well, he did 
say quarter past ten. No, don’t worry, we’ll come back. What is his diary looking like next Tuesday? Shall we say 12, then? And make sure he doesn’t forget this time. Dear me, anyone would think he was avoiding us.’ 


Although, admirably, the FA pre-empted football’s adoption of the WADA ruling by more than 18 months, those within the sport have been most resistant to welcoming the whereabouts procedure. Sir Alex Ferguson, the Manchester United manager, 
referred to the rules as a nuisance. He painted a picture of a stereotypically dozy footballer, going shopping with his wife in the very hour when the club have told the testers he was available at home. 

‘You know what young people are like,’ he said. 

And yes, we do know what young people are like. We each know hundreds of them who every day get up for school, or work, and abide by a code every bit as stringent as that applied to professional athletes, a body of men who measure their weekly salaries in tens of thousands of pounds not pocket money. In return for this exceptional reward, surely it is not too much to expect a bit of personal responsibility.
The most troubling aspect of this is that far-reaching changes could be made to all sport, for the benefit of a selfish few. Mid-ranking volleyball players in Belgium have got the hump because they have to conform to the same regulations as elite athletes. Footballers are moaning that they are receiving the same treatment as track and field athletes, when there is no comparable history of drug taking. 


Well, tough. Sometimes a few sacrifices have to be made to keep sport clean. The moment WADA treat one group as a special case it invites complacency. Anyway, we 
all know how much money is at stake in football these days; who knows what would be going on if the authorities were not vigilant? 

The cry is that the whereabouts rules put intolerable demands on athletes, but forget invasions of privacy-this is about nothing more complex than getting to work on time. Far from being asked for an unreasonable level of commitment, athletes are merely required to be in one place for one hour at one specific time each day. It is no different to the fact that your boss expects you to be at your desk at 9am each morning. If you have a dental appointment or all the pipes have burst and you are waiting for a plumber, you telephone your office and explain. This is what is expected of the modern sportsman. 

For the good of all, WADA demand that Manchester United players are at a certain venue, for instance the training ground, between 10am and 11am each day. If a player is going to be absent they wish to be notified. If a player has a day off, WADA will also need a time, maybe between 7am and 8am, when he will be at home. Chances are the player will not be troubled. If he is, then it is his job to be where he said he will be, just as it is your responsibility to be in work at the time required by the management. Is this an invasion of privacy? No, it is a duty of employment, just as it is the duty of athletes to support steps to ensure their sport is clean. It may be a nuisance to Ferguson, his players, and the volleyball players of Belgium, but they should not 
expect too much sympathy from those holding down proper jobs. 

