There used to be a celebration in the city of Detroit called Devil’s Night. It started as a bit of mischief on October 30, the eve of Hallowe’en. 

Egg-throwing,soap graffiti on windows,stringing toilet paper in neighbouring trees but, overtime, petty crime was replaced by something darker. 
 
In a declining city, arson, then murder, became the currency.
Landlords would use the date to torch a derelict or unsaleable property, blaming vandals and collecting the insurance. 

A burning building is also a good place to dump a body after settling a score.
In 1984, 800 properties went up in flames. 

Finally, Dennis W. Archer, mayor of Detroit, invented Angel’s Night to solve the problem, with 40,000 volunteers making regular patrols throughout the city between October 29 and 31.
English football has its own Devil’s Night, except it lasts a month and is called the January transfer window. 

It used to be about mischief, but quickly degenerated and now there are fires all over town.
The ill-feeling between the clubs is so great that Premier League chairmen are to discuss ending the arrangement. 

  
The transfer window and Devil’s Night have the same flaw, which is that there is a way to behave that is right and decent and to allow people to take a break from it, however temporary, invites mayhem.
If it is vandalism to throw eggs at houses on September 30, then it is on October 30, too. 

And if it is wrong to act up, tap up, play up or stitch up through the rest of the season, then that should apply in January.
Wenger would like no transfers after the season has begun, but allowances would have to be made for exceptional circumstances and the last thing football needs is another set of rules lacking clarity.
The old way, the laissez-faire way, of transfer activity through the season was better. 

There were still fractious moments and rotten behaviour, as there will always be in a competitive, lucrative business, but the thought processes were more measured and the tone more civilised than this frenzied, furious, fire sale.
This past month, the majority of the Premier League would appear to have fallen out with Harry Redknapp, the Tottenham manager, while any creation that can provoke a slanging match between old comrades Mark Hughes, at Manchester City, and Steve Bruce, at Wigan, is surely due a rethink.
There are many examples of nefarious conduct but the tales circulating of the way City have behaved in their desperation to bolster Hughes’s squad are shocking, if true.
There is enough skulduggery in football as it is, without factoring in a week when the underhand is as good as officially endorsed.
Nobody expects managers to act like angels, but we could at least remove this excuse for a pact with the devil each time we ring in the New Year.
