The most over worn statement of recent weeks is that football has a fierce financial reckoning ahead. Austerity for all is gleefully predicted, bankruptcies, calamity, a pecuniary wake-up from hell. There is one problem with this theory. It is Ballacks.
Well, Ballack’s contract, to be precise. A piece of paper that would indicate that English football may be in a better position to buck the trend than the majority of businesses, perhaps even yours. And this is why...

 

Michael Ballack earns £121,000 per week playing for Chelsea, which many see as excessive. He is 32 and his contract expires at the end of this season. So, if Roman Abramovich needs to cut costs in times of recession and does not think Ballack is value for money, he can let him go in June and it will cost him...
Nothing. 
Not a cent. Not even a handshake if he cannot spare the time. No redundancy package, no severance pay; Ballack walks and, in that instant, Chelsea save at least £6,292,000 over the next year. They might not want to. They might think keeping him represents excellent value for money.


 

The point is, try doing that at Marks and Spencer. Try getting one senior employee off the staff anywhere, in fact, without racking up a raft of compensation costs. 

This is what separates football from the rest. Each season, perhaps a third of the most expensive employees can be released without cost. This is every managing director’s dream. 


Do you think those in charge of Nissan would tot up 1,200 redundancy packages if they could shed double that number on a wave and a smile? 
As financial crisis bites, every company is cutting manpower, yet none can do it as ruthlessly as a football club.
Chelsea are believed to have as many as 12 young reserve players currently available. For now, they could be transferred or loaned. When the time comes they will be written off more cheaply than any cog on the Nissan production line.
In Ballack’s case, he is a significant first-team player and it could be argued that Chelsea would be weaker without him. 

These are debates for the good times, however, not in the midst of economic meltdown. A major club can reduce costs dramatically in what equates to an instant. In the Premier League, particularly, there is always a way out (as there is for Ballack, who could play elsewhere or even stay, with a substantial pay cut).
Each week, football receives situation at West Ham, for instance, is not proof of morbidity, but resilience. There is no other element of the business empire of owner Bjorgolfur Gudmundsson that could generate serious revenue as quickly in the current climate as a sale of players at Upton Park.
Yes, there would be a savage impact on the fortunes of the team and the club would limp on in a reduced state, but what would have rescued Gudmundsson from financial calamity? Not banking, shipping, property or publishing. Football.
 
Keith Harris, a man who could sell football clubs in a market when a chimpanzee with a BlackBerry could sell football clubs, now predicts dire times ahead. 

‘The era of billionaire bail-outs is over,’ read a headline above an interview in which he suggested that takeovers were no longer the solution to football’s woes.
Except they never were. Malcolm Glazer did not bail out Manchester United, no more than Tom Hicks and George Gillett bailed out Liverpool. Many purchases were investment opportunities. The idea that the current generation of club owners are knights on white chargers rescuing insolvent companies is a myth.
Of course, football will be hit by the financial downturn, as all businesses will. Television and commercial revenue may drop and reins will be pulled in, but the widespread disaster will not happen. You will not see Abramovich or his best players down the Job Centre in the next year. 

Although the way certain media outlets are reacting to this crisis, the same cannot be said of the harbingers of doom.
