In the bob skeleton event at the Salt Lake City winter Olympic Games in 2002, Alex Coomber of Great Britain was the woman to beat. She had won the world title three years in a row and set records from La Plagne, France, to Nagano, Japan. 
 
On the day of the Olympic run, however, it started snowing. Snow is the skeleton slider’s nightmare because even a light dusting can slow the run and add precious fractions to the time. Teams of maintenance staff work as hard as they can to keep the ice clear during snowfall. Or, at least, they should.
When it was Coomber’s turn in Salt Lake there was a suspicion that the sweepers knocked off a little early. Coomber took bronze. Gold and silver went to two Americans, Tristan Gale, who had rarely finished in the top 10 that season, and Lea Ann Parsley, who was barely on the podium at world title events.
Gale was sliding on her home track. That is what happens in international sport: the hosts look after No 1. Stoke City’s groundsman used to flood the pitch to slow the play for an ageing Stanley Matthews. Test wickets are not prepared for the benefit of the tourists. 
At the next winter Games in Vancouver, British hopes in the skeleton rest with Shelley Rudman, an Olympic silver medallist, and Amy Williams, who has enjoyed a top-six finish in seven out of eight World Cup events this season. As the main event looms, however, both women are finding it tough to get training time abroad. Britain has no facilities and relies on favours, which are beginning to dry up. This is a familiar story. Consider the fuss that is being made about Australian cricketers preparing for the Ashes with English counties. 


Now consider what is being proposed for Rebecca Adlington, Great Britain’s double Olympic gold medallist swimmer. In readiness for the 2012 Games in London, the Government is clumsily laying the ground for the cancellation of her best event, the women’s 800metres freestyle, in the name of gender equality. 
Tessa Jowell, the Olympics minister, has already lobbied UK Sport over the fact that, at the last Games in Beijing, men had the opportunity to win 40 medals more than women. At first, it was thought this would just mean the introduction of sports such as women’s boxing. There is, however, an IOC limit of 301 events, the same as in 2008, so additions work on a one in, one out, basis.
 

FINA, swimming’s governing body, are looking to comply with the wish for sex equality and are reviewing the anomalies in their schedule: the women’s 800m and the men’s 1500m, both single gender contests. 
Instead of adding races, the suggestion is that the women’s 800m will be scrapped and replaced by the 1500m, bringing it into line with the men. If this happens, Adlington, who won at 400m and 800m in Beijing, will not get to defend one gold medal and will have her involvement halved. There is too much difference between the 400mand 1500m to train for both. ‘My event, my favourite, the one I’ve always swum,’ is how she describes the 800m. And at her home Games, we might help take it away from her. 

Only in Britain, you can guarantee that. 
