The Football Association will this morning begin an investigation into the circumstances around the transfer of Matthew Spring from Luton Town to Charlton Athletic, on the basis of possible third party interference from Sheffield United. 
Don't hold your breath. 
It has long been Sheffield United's lot to be painted as victims of grave injustice, so do not expect this latest twist to make a ripple in that smug little pond, or to appear anywhere beyond these pages. Even so, this is important; or it would be if football cared for anything more than grand gestures to the gallery. 

Spring did not play for Charlton against Sheffield United in the FA Cup on Saturday because of an agreement between the clubs. Such cosy deals are legal now except Spring was never a permanent Sheffield United player. He was a Luton Town player, who spent time on loan at Bramall Lane. This is how it worked.
Charlton then bought him but, as a condition of the deal, it was agreed that he could not play against Sheffield United in the FA Cup. Charlton did not even register him for the competition, despite Spring featuring in their League games with Nottingham Forest and Sheffield Wednesday. 
This was confirmed on the official Charlton website before the fourth-round tie. 'Also unavailable,' it reported, 'is midfielder Matthew Spring under an agreement that was struck with the Blades following his release from a season-long loan at Bramall Lane earlier this month, that enabled him to complete a permanent switch to The Valley from Luton Town.' 
Still with me? 
In other words, Sheffield United were able to de-select from the opposing team a player who had never been owned solely by them. Take that one to its potential conclusion. 
The Football League, despite Lord Mawhinney's (right) regular land-grabs for the high moral ground, do not have rules governing third party interference, and a spokesman yesterday presented this issue as a hospital pass to the Football Association, who have been so anxious for involvement in third party rulings in the past. 
Now they have the chance. Rule C1 (b), clause 3 states: 'No club shall enter into a contract which enables any other party to that contract to acquire the ability materially to influence the club's policies or performance of its teams in matches and/or competition.'
In English? For Spring to join Charlton, his registration would have to be held at that moment by Luton, not Sheffield United. And once this document was restored to Luton, Sheffield United became a third party and any involvement in his career should cease. 
For Sheffield to then influence whether a permanent Charlton signing plays against them is therefore third party interference; just as it was when Sheffield and Watford publicly announced the gentlemen's agreement that kept Steve Kabba out of the Watford line-up against his former club in 2007, the year Sheffield went down.

In their last five matches, it was Sheffield United's sole win. Somehow, the Premier League allowed those clubs off the hook, because the arrangement was denied and nothing was in writing. 
Chances are that Sheffield United will get away with it again. Despite all that has happened these last two seasons, the rules seem either vague, easily circumvented or non-existent. 
Many pontificate, but few seem moved to act. We have, however, cornered the market in hypocrisy. 
For clearly, it is unthinkable that a man as publicly committed to fair play as Kevin McCabe, chairman of Sheffield United, would not have checked the regulations first and ensured that everything about Spring's transfer was above board and not at all wonky or open to abuse. 
And what a good thing that is, really, for otherwise a fellow could get quite confused by football's new morality
