It was not just the result. It was not the performance. It was not even the decline that began towards the end of last year and has continued into 2009. It is what Sunday’s match said about the future of Chelsea, long and short term, that should worry those charged with the stewardship of the club.
Where do Chelsea go from here? Indeed, where are they now going, this season or next, under Luiz Felipe Scolari?
It is not just that Chelsea would appear to possess no equivalent of Wayne Rooney or Cristiano Ronaldo, young players whose greatness has been established even before their athletic peak. 

It is not that Ryan Giggs would appear to be growing old more gracefully than Michael Ballack. 

The problems are more basic than that.


Where, for instance, is Chelsea’s equivalent of Jonny Evans, the young central defender who filled in so capably for Rio Ferdinand? 

Where are the players that are coming through, where are the thrusting rivals for Frank Lampard, Didier Drogba or Deco, men whose days in the sun are surely numbered?
Manchester United have players whose value would be measured in tens of millions in the current market; not so Chelsea. 
 
This is a team coming to the end and not enough thought has been given to the transition.
The league table has these rivals neck and neck, but they looked a world apart on Sunday. 

Sir Alex Ferguson, the Manchester United manager, invariably finds a way of keeping his playing squad fresh, but at Chelsea a series of managerial changes mean not enough thought has been given to renewal. 

United have players of quality on the pitch and in reserve; Chelsea have a void.
They do not look good enough to compete this season and the next generation will not be ready by the 2009-10 season. 

If Chelsea are to challenge in Scolari’s time — he only signed a two-year contract — it will need another vast investment from Roman Abramovich in the summer.
The owner was not at Old Trafford on Sunday — he was taking advantage of the traditional Russian holiday period with Daria Zhukova, his girlfriend — so he missed the opportunity for a reunion with a man whose presence in the directors’ box only served to highlight the blue malaise.
Jose Mourinho, now manager of Inter Milan, was here ostensibly to spy on Manchester United ahead of their meeting in the Champions League second round but unlike most scouts, including Fabio Capello, the England manager, he stayed to the bitter end, studying Chelsea’s disintegration without outward emotion.
Inside , who knows what Mourinho was feeling? 

That he watched to the final whistle was seen by some as a Machiavellian desire to let those responsible for his departure twist in the wind for his amusement, unable to leave the scene of their greatest humiliation in a Premier League game since February 2006.
More probably, Mourinho had a late flight to Milan so had no pressing reason to exit.
 
Either way, few could escape the thought that this defeat, this insipid response to Manchester United’s late first-half lead, would not have happened had he been in charge. 

Mourinho did not know the meaning of defeat in the Premier League against the Champions League elite; by contrast, Scolari does not know the meaning of victory.
He has taken one point from a possible 12 against Manchester United, Liverpool and Arsenal this season: a draw and three defeats. With this reversal, he has now lost to them all.
With each passing month, Scolari’s rivals are downgraded. Before Christmas, he was looking over his shoulder for Liverpool. Then Liverpool passed him and he began looking for Manchester United. Now United are on Chelsea’s heels with games in hand. Who next? Aston Villa? Arsenal? On this form, it is no longer unthinkable.
 
Wednesday brings an FA Cup replay at Southend United and what was once considered a momentary lapse in the conventional state of things is now an altogether treacherous affair.
Chelsea are potential giant-killing fodder, something that would never have happened under Mourinho.
Maybe his expressionless face was registering inner disgust.
This is to take nothing away from the performance of Manchester United. 

Certainly, that which took place in the second half. 

Until half-time, Chelsea gave as good as they got, albeit without a cutting edge.
Their passing was neat and inventive, little triangles all over the pitch, even if it did not take them in behind a resilient back four. 

Yet it was their reaction to United’s first goal, from Nemanja Vidic, that exposed the difference in the teams.
United grew in confidence, created better chances, looked utterly assured at the back. 

Chelsea lost air like a deflated balloon. 

Nicolas Anelka arrived to little effect and at the moment Scolari was poised to introduce Juliano Belletti in place of Jose Bosingwa at full back, United scored a second through Rooney and the contest ended.
 
Apparently, the day after Steven Gerrard was arrested over the fracas in the Southport bar, Ferguson arrived at the Manchester United training ground in a state of high excitement.
Seeing his players poring over the news in the papers he seized his moment. 

‘See?’ he snarled. 

‘That Liverpool lot are celebrating already. They think they have won it.’
All nonsense, of course, the sort of mind games Rafael Benitez clearly thought were being played in public, rather than private; but it did the trick.
Manchester United played on Sunday like a team that had a point to prove, that wanted to knock the League leaders off their perch, in true Ferguson style.
Chelsea, meanwhile, have long ceased celebrating those autumn days when they played in the style of potential champions.
At Old Trafford, that particular party was well and truly over.

