Dwain Chambers does not emerge well from his autobiography. He knows that. He is ready for the fact that many will be repelled by the litany of drug abuse contained therein. Yet whatever judgments are to be made about the man, the conclusions about his sport must be worse. 

For Chambers' book is a cheat's charter. How they do it, when they do it, where they do it, set down in black and white. He has even included a monthly calendar, detailing precise consumption, to reveal 300 dope days in a calendar year. And for two years he did not fail a test. 
He has provided this information to the athletics authorities, too, with his views, and those of pharmacologist Victor Conte, on the right time to catch the cheats. And what has been done? Nothing, he claims. It is almost as if athletics does not want to confront its problem or, more likely, it does not want to hear the truth.
        
'They should narrow it down. Test the top 20, and any that creep into that group during the year, repeatedly. Prevention is about testing the right people at the right time. I gave them the paperwork and all that happened was a load of shock, horror headlines that I was taking seven drugs. Yet I went a long time with no positive tests and, if I hadn't got sloppy, we could still be doing it. 

'So who knows where we are now? They need to act because the moment gene doping comes in, forget it. They need blood on data now so they can see the differences in future years.'
   
Is it that, if athletics attacked its problem in the way Chambers suggests, it would find out more than it wished to know? Busting the odd bogeyman and throwing him to the public is a good PR exercise, but when the Balco scandal brought down many of the leading athletes in the world, that was hardly good for business. Now the sprint game has a new star, Usain Bolt, the fastest man in the world. Dare athletics mess with that cash cow? 

The latest plan is for a new world league of athletics, 12 meetings from May to September spread over three continents. The biggest names in athletics will be asked to commit to the scheme, known as the Diamond League. And, if they do, there will be even less motivation for weeding out the cheats if it damages the reputation and quality of athletics' prestigious new competition. 

The sport already abandons its rules when it suits, as happened with Christine Ohuruogu, and if this is what takes place in public who knows what deals might be cut behind closed doors? Stories are already rife of invitational meetings in which star athletes include exemption from drug testing as a condition of their participation. 

In his autobiography, Chambers estimates that half the American athletes on show in Beijing were using drugs. He wanted to name names but was warned off legally. What pervades his story, however, is athletics' conspiracy of silence. 

In one passage, Chambers describes how Conte arrived at the World Championships in 2003, claiming to be a nutritionist and eager to share the credit for the performances of his athletes. He promoted his services in interviews, but what exactly did he have to push, what story was there to tell, and why did nobody peer beneath the facade? It took a jealous rival sending a sample of Conte's designer steroid, THG, to testers to make his empire crumble. And satisfied with a few high-profile scalps, athletics slipped back into torpor. 

What athletics is not ready for is Chambers the whistle-blower because his experiences highlight their shallow gestures. One cannot help but think that what the sport most hates about him is not that he took drugs, but that his revelations expose the culpability of others in the process. His book is like that little phial of THG, the one that opened up an unseen world of hypocrisy and deception.
