THE Football Association got lucky with the Lord Griffiths ruling. His stance on Carlos Tevez gave the impression that Soho Square sweat the big stuff like governance, regulation and justice when, in fact, all they want is a quiet life. It was just a happy accident that Griffiths was appointed to head the Tevez tribunal and make the FA look like good guys.

The reality became apparent last week when it was confirmed there would be no further action over the Matthew Spring transfer.
Spring moved from Luton Town to Charlton Athletic but, because he had been on loan at Sheffield United, it was agreed he could not play for Charlton against Sheffield United in the FA Cup. It was not the crime of the century, but it was wrong, because it was third party interference. If there are three clubs in the transfer, there are three parties, QED, and that is not allowed.
After a delay of two months hoping it would go away, which also gave time for Sheffield United to be knocked out of the competition by Hull City, a spokesman for the FA confirmed that the governing body saw Spring's transfer as 'a loan system problem, not third party ownership'.
Of course, it never was third party ownership, because Sheffield United did not own Spring's registration. That was the point. It was interference.
And even though the FA's inertia and football's desire to brush gentlemen's agreements and other cosy third-party arrangements under the carpet was predicted in this column right from the start, they were still asked if a representative of governance would explain the decision and why, at the very least, there was no warning or even a case to answer.
Yes, we'll speak off the record, came the reply. No, on the record, it was insisted. The FA must be able to explain these decisions or enter the realm of the Football League who, you may remember, were revealed to have silent rules, which allowed Jermain Defoe to play for Tottenham Hotspur against Burnley having signed halfway through a Carling Cup semi-final.
 
Then, the next day, the FA announced by text message, that nobody from governance could go on the record after all. Questioned, a representative of the press office gave the reason 'in case they trip themselves up'. Jonathan Hall, the Director of Football Services at the FA, was also 'not interested in speaking on this issue'.
Spring's transfer was never going to see a club relegated nor deducted points, but it was symptomatic of the way football operates, shouting about justice one minute, organising a carve-up on the quiet the next.
Double standards are everywhere. Fulham intend suing West Ham United because it is alleged Tevez's performances affected their league position, although there remains a suspicion that their real grudge concerns a dodgy gentlemen's agreement they had going over Luis Boa Morte, who was sold to West Ham on the illicit understanding he would not play against them in the league that year. West Ham reneged on the deal and played him anyway.
What is now apparent is that the FA, far from taking a strong lead on suspicious transfers, is complicit in them. Depressingly predictable, but worrying because third-party transfers continue to take place every season in English football and, until the game stops hiding behind its one, big show trial, it will always be that way.
