There is one question concerning the English wish to host the forthcoming Test series between Australia and Pakistan: right now, why would anybody want to make nice with the Pakistan Cricket Board? 
First, Allen Stanford and now this. Giles Clarke, chairman of the England and Wales Cricket Board, can certainly pick his mates: an alleged billion-dollar fraudster and, next up, a band of self-serving charlatans, unwilling to take even the tiniest responsibility for a tragedy that happened on their watch. Was English cricket not meant to check between the sheets before jumping into bed these days?
Scroll down for more
 
Whether going soft on star players testing positive for performance enhancing drugs or taking a bullish stance on the right of a captain to lead his team in a dressing-room strike, the PCB have rarely impressed, but even by their standards, some of the statements made following the attack on the Sri Lankan team in Lahore constitute a fresh low.
Butt, the PCB chairman, branded the opinions of Chris Board, the match referee, obnoxious and false. The word of one man, he called it, even though the one man was an eye witness. Broad had claimed the officials and the Sri Lankan party were left like sitting ducks as a result of poor security. Independent voices, including former England player Dominic Cork and the Australian umpiring team of Simon Taufel and Steve Davis, confirm this.
   
For too long it has been impossible to denounce the culture of corruption that has infested cricket in Pakistan without suffering reprisal from a powerful political lobby that rarely wastes an opportunity to pitch east against west. Even the disgraceful forfeit at The Oval in 2006 has been rewritten with Pakistan as victims. The useless International Cricket Council first changed the result of the match to a draw before relenting, but Darrell Hair, the umpire, remains the villain.
While events on the field bear no relation to a bloody terrorist attack, the reaction of the leading voices within cricket in Pakistan to murder in Lahore reveals a culture that shirks any accountability for its actions; an unreliable friend, at least.
Yesterday Butt was even suggesting that the World Cup would go ahead in Pakistan in 2011 and Test cricket could be played there before the end of the year. This craven attempt to place pressure on the ICC combines self interest and deadly potential in equal measure.
 
With no little irony, since the attack Pakistan cricket has attempted to shoot the messenger.
Javed Miandad, who recently stood down as director general of the PCB, called for the ICC to ban Broad for life. 'He has intentionally tried to damage the image of Pakistan and isolate it as a cricket nation,' Miandad said. 'Terror can happen anywhere, terrorists hit Mumbai.'
Indeed they did and the father-in-law of Miandad's son Junaid is Dawood Ibrahim, head of the D-Company crime syndicate and the man alleged to be the logistical brain of the Mumbai massacre.
Imran Khan, now a senior politician in Pakistan, thinks dirty foreigners were to blame. 'It could be India, Afghanistan, the Tamil Tigers,' he said. 'The motive is to damage the state of Pakistan and end cricket there.'
We have been here before. Remember when, if there was a riot involving Millwall fans, it was invariably claimed that supporters of rival clubs had infiltrated the ranks, smashed up the away end and framed them? Later, the 9/11 attacks turned out to be a Jewish conspiracy. This is the logic here. India tried to murder the Sri Lankan cricket team to make Pakistan look bad.
It is hard to know where to start with this non-sense but the bottom line is that it is never Pakistan's fault.
Inzamam-ul-Haq refuses to attend a judicial inquiry into match-fixing and ends up as captain of his country. He leads his players off the pitch in protest at the decision of an umpire and team manager Zaheer Abbas later claims moral victory.
Shoaib Akhtar and Mohammad Asif test positive for nandrolone and go unpunished by the PCB. When the ICC say they will be tested at the World Cup, they pull out on squad deadline day, citing injury and no subsequent action is taken.
Pakistan's influence on the ICC is such that last year it was only 19 days before the country was due to host the ICC Champions Trophy that the event was cancelled due to security concerns.
Without a stinging report from Bob Nicholls of Nicholls Steyn and Associates, obsequious ICC politics would have been placed ahead of player safety. In the current climate, it is hard to think of a more dangerous and unwholesome influence on modern sport than the PCB.
Some evocative portraits of the passion for cricket in Pakistan have been painted - albeit glossing over the empty stadiums for Tests - and the brilliance of their individual cricketers cannot be denied. Right now, the instinctive reaction is to offer those players sympathy and support.
Yet, in doing so, the ECB will not just be importing Pakistan's mercurial talent for the game but the baggage that accompanies it. When Bob Woolmer, the Pakistan coach, died suddenly during the World Cup in 2007, it was this history that led to whispers of murder rumours being so readily entertained. His family believe he died of natural causes; the coroner recorded an open verdict.
This is not a healthy sporting culture. Bent matches, political division: this is the big stuff. It goes beyond trivial squabbles over ball-tampering because if it was just about the cricket, then welcome; everybody thrills to the game played by Pakistan.
The reality is that security is still the issue here, because cricket needs protection from the machinations of the PCB. If Dubai wants them, good luck.
