There must have been times, particularly late in his managerial career at Nottingham Forest, when Brian Clough was beset by worry and self doubt; when he thought his powers of motivation were waning, when he feared, to use one of his favoured phrases, that he had shot it. The thing is, we're just not interested in them. 

We don’t want Clough the introspective tortured genius and this is why the makers of the film The Damned United air-brushed those darker elements out of the script. The genuine Clough quote that is being used to publicise the work is how we like to remember him. 'I certainly wouldn’t say I am the best manager in the business,' Clough says, 'but I’m in the top one.' 

The public has a love-hate relationship with arrogance, particularly in the sporting sense. When Jose Mourinho was manager of Chelsea he only had to stand imperiously on the touchline in that grey overcoat to send collective blood pressure through the roof. Yet who beyond Manchester did not secretly adore that pitch-side sprint when his Porto team scored at Old Trafford.
 

The public has a love-hate relationship with arrogance, particularly in the sporting sense. When Jose Mourinho was manager of Chelsea he only had to stand imperiously on the touchline in that grey overcoat to send collective blood pressure through the roof. Yet who beyond Manchester did not secretly adore that pitch-side sprint when his Porto team scored at Old Trafford.
    
Mourinho was often polite about United, and Sir Alex Ferguson, their manager, but that does not stick in the mind, either. He will always be The Special One, the man who picked fights with everyone from Rafael Benitez to the Reading ambulance service. He was the manager who named not only his starting XI before an important Champions League tie but Barcelona’s as well, infuriating their coach, Frank Rijkaard. And we miss him. 


Not just football writers desperate for a good quote but the public, too, because in essence the Premier League is a somewhat one-dimensional competition enlivened by its personalities. It was fascinating to observe the mental duels between Mourinho, Ferguson, Arsene Wenger and Benitez, even if they were of little significance to the real action, and the manager with the best players invariably won. 


Arrogance humbled is never without appeal so the presence of Cristiano Ronaldo adds spice to the meeting of Manchester United and Inter Milan tonight because by Thursday morning somebody’s ego is going to be in need of a Band-Aid. 

Ronaldo has his position as the world’s best footballer to protect but this is a far bigger match for Mourinho. The Champions League is the competition by which he will be defined in Italian football.

Inter Milan are romping away with the league this year, as has happened in two previous seasons, and although no fan will ever tire of that, the best managers seek to attain a fresh level of success rather than maintain an existing one. Mourinho’s holy grail is the Champions League, because that is something his predecessor, Roberto Mancini, did not win. 

At Chelsea, falling short in Europe was frustrating but did not affect his legacy because he was delivering the club’s first domestic title in half a century. Yet while winning Serie A will be a personal landmark for a man whose ambition is title winners’ medals in four countries (Portugal, England, Italy and Spain), it will not set him apart. This matters to Mourinho. He is The Special One, remember, not A Special One.

Even those who fancied Inter going into the two-leg tie came away from the San Siro stadium shocked at the gulf in class between the sides. If United hit that level of performance again, the only way Mourinho can hope to triumph is through a combination of good fortune and the sort of smash and grab raid he pulled off at Old Trafford with Porto. 

 

If he loses, his next move is interesting, though. Does he have another crack with Inter next year, or lobby for a move to Spain, where the Real Madrid job is likely to be up for grabs in the summer. With Barcelona in the ascendancy, there is certainly work to be done there.

Yet it is also common knowledge that Mourinho hankers after the turbulent fun of the Premier League and has talked quite openly with facilitators of engineering a return. He is no fool. Far from tactfully ruling himself out of future employment at Manchester United at a time when he is leading a club against them in opposition, he has all but nailed his CV to the door. Not the visitors' entrance, either. 

When Mourinho goes to Old Trafford, which he does quite a lot, it is said he arrives at the gate that is reserved for players and officials and makes his way around the place as if trying it on for size. Perhaps he knows something we do not. 

Rio Ferdinand, tipped to be Gary Neville’s successor as Manchester United captain, speculated that only a manager with the bravado of Mourinho could succeed Ferguson, and he is right. The idea of having another empire builder in Ferguson’s image is far-fetched because there is genuinely nobody like him. Wenger would be the only individual even remotely in tune with such a project, and he has one under way at Arsenal. 

It would take any foreign coach years to replicate what Ferguson has done and a leading British manager, such as Martin O’Neill, might require a similar period to escape from Ferguson’s shadow, despite his many qualities. 

That is the appeal of Mourinho, a personality so big there is no question of it being crushed by expectation. He may pay scant attention to Ferguson’s cherished youth policy, but that aspect of the club could run itself for a time and the man who follows Mourinho – who is not the sort to stay for long – can pick up where Ferguson left off. Mourinho could take the short-term pressure without damaging the long-term future.
 
If not United for Mourinho, then where? Arsenal supporters recoil in horror at the suggestion he might one day follow Wenger, as if the club has been the preserve of romantic idealists shackled to a doctrine of pure football through many decades, not since the arrival of one man. 

Before Wenger, of course, the club was in the grip of that free-spirited radical George Graham, and supporters celebrated the same single goal victories for which Mourinho is now derided.

Graham’s teams could play lovely football on the counter-attack, but he believed in solid defence as a priority and built his success from the back. Remind you of anyone? Mourinho’s suitability at Arsenal is also rubbished because it is perceived that his rebuilding projects require a £200million investment, overlooking the fact that he drew Roman Abramovich’s attention by winning the Champions League with Porto on a comparative shoestring. 

Finally, Arsenal supporters would never take to his football. What five goalless draws in eight matches, you mean? Oh, sorry, that was Wenger.
