The footage of the challenge by Pablo Mills, the Rotherham United midfield player, on Nathan Elder, the Brentford striker, is inconclusive. Mills would seem to have his eyes on the ball and does not check the whereabouts of his opponent, which is the first clue to a premeditated attack. 

That said, he does lead with an arm and use extreme force which is, at best, reckless and, at worst, wantonly dangerous and actionable. 

Elder is unlikely to get vision back in his left eye for several months, has a double fracture of the cheekbone, a fractured eye socket, severe trauma to the left eyeball and bleeding in and around the area. Unsurprisingly, Andy Scott, his manager is calling for the Football Association to step in.
 
This will be difficult, however, when earlier in the season a more obvious case of assault on the football field was dismissed. Chris Morgan, the Sheffield United central defender, had his feet planted squarely on the ground when he jabbed an elbow into the skull of Iain Hume, the Barnsley striker, causing brain damage.

Video evidence shows Morgan checking to see where Hume is first. Andy D’Urso, the referee, even gave him a yellow card, which was pitifully inadequate, but more than Mills got for the challenge on Elder. Karl Evans, the referee in that game, restarted with a drop ball and is believed to be standing by that decision.

 
 
The FA took no further action against Morgan, who should have been punished heavily. If he had not been seen on a pitch for six months after that incident, nobody outside his club, perhaps except for Neil Warnock, would have complained. 

Of course, had that happened, it would then be easier to deal with Mills because a precedent about the need for responsibility would have been set, and the intent issue would be less significant.

It is not enough to talk of football as a man’s game, as Mark Robins, the manager of Rotherham, did. There remains a duty of care, to which neither Morgan, nor Mills, adhered. 

As the FA had previously failed to exercise it to protect Hume, however, it is hard to see how they can now successfully move in more ambiguous circumstances. 

What would certainly be wrong is if Mills is pursued vigorously merely to compensate for the mistake that was made over Morgan. 

Bad behaviour not stopped is encouraged. The FA should hang its head over this one.
