Oh, the joys of winter—chestnuts roasting on an open fire, sleigh bells, snow-topped mountains and…kids home from school for two weeks straight. It’s a lot more difficult to say, “Go out and play” when it’s 20 degrees outside. Never fear. You can battle your kids’ winter blahs by preparing an arsenal of indoor activities that will help them to expend their candy cane-fueled energy and nestle all snug in their beds.

Young Children
Traffic Jam
This game is a variation of Red Light, Green Light. Children imagine they’re driving some kind of vehicle—an SUV, monster truck, etc. With upbeat music playing in the background, they cruise around the house. As the traffic cop, you tell the drivers how they must proceed—by hopping, skipping, shuffling, crab walking, tip-toeing, etc. Whenever you push pause on the music, the drivers must stop. If the drivers fail to stop, or crash into other drivers, they must head to the repair shop. Designate an area for the repair shop where the kids do stretching exercises until you tell them they’re allowed to join traffic again. You might have to show them a few stretches. Keep playing until the music runs out or your little cars run out of gas.

Older Children
Jigsaw Jam
Cut out a large picture of your kids’ favorite cartoon character or sports figure from a magazine or web site. Glue it to a piece of construction paper. Cut it into puzzle pieces. On the back of each piece, write an activity—like hop on one foot, jog, army crawl, etc. Hide the pieces around the house. The goal is to complete the puzzle in record time. (Set a timer.) Working as a team, the kids run to find a piece of the puzzle. When they do, they must follow the activity written on the back of the piece as they bring the piece back to the table. They follow that same activity as they look for another piece of the puzzle. With each new piece they follow the corresponding activity. If they stop the activity while looking for a puzzle piece, they get 5 seconds added to their time. Keep playing until the puzzle is fully assembled. Be prepared with other homemade puzzles in case the kids want to beat their time.

Does the thought of cutting puzzle pieces sound far-fetched between wrapping presents and addressing holiday cards? You can always fall back on the following activities to keep the little ones active:

The Classics
Freeze Dance—Always a hit with young children.
Twister—Yes, the good, old-fashioned game is great for strength and flexibility.
Sports Charades—Write different sports on small slips of paper. Kids act out the sport while everyone tries to guess what it is. Stretch while waiting for a turn.
Choreograph a Dance—Set them loose with their favorite song. See my column called 5,6,7,8 Dance!  for more details.

Tech Choices
There are a few good kids’ fitness DVDs on the market, which we’ll explore in a future column. Active video games like "Dance Dance Revolution" and various Nintendo Wii games are also an option. They’re no replacement for real physical exercise, but a better choice then zoning out in front of the TV.

Indoor Circuit Training
There are a multitude of kid-friendly stations you can set up in your home. Check The Fit Family archives for Family Circuits 1 – 3. 

Exercising Outdoors
Being cooped up inside can lead to the “winter blahs." Kids might feel more tired, lethargic, or bored. Since both sunlight and exercise are natural mood enhancers, it makes sense to be active outdoors if possible. Barring extreme cold weather, it is safe for kids to exercise outdoors. However, there are a few precautions to take:

Kids should wear multiple layers of clothing, with the outer layer   consisting of a waterproof fabric like nylon.
A hat is also important since a lot of body heat radiates from the head. 
Sunscreen is sometimes necessary, especially when the sun reflects off the snow.
And finally, sweat loss may not be as obvious as when exercising in the heat. Remember to keep kids hydrated when they exercise in the cold. Hot apple cider sounds nice…
