As we embark on a new year, many of you will naturally pause to take stock of your accomplishments. But catch yourself before slipping into the “coulda, shoulda, wouldas.” Instead, focus on 2009 and all the hurdles you’ll jump and obstacles you’ll conquer. Take this positive approach while crafting your goals for the New Year. Goal setting is an important method of deciding what’s important in your life. Since accomplishing these goals builds self-confidence, goal setting is a tool that’s fit for the whole family.

Start by designating Family Goal-Setting Day. You might even want to call it your annual “I Can Do It” Day or “Goalapalooza,” and make it a tradition. Talk to your kids about the benefits of goal setting. Goals help you to make better decisions and live your life with purpose. By setting and accomplishing goals, you have the opportunity to create your own destiny. Kids and teens often feel like they have no control over their lives, so this ability to create their own future can sound very appealing.

At this point, everyone in the family disperses to a quiet spot to think about their life and what changes or improvements they want to make. Soft, instrumental music adds to the experience. Next, the family members reconvene to craft their goals. Young children may not grasp the intangible quality of goal setting, but they will benefit from the family bonding time. In my work with older kids, I’ve experienced great success in teaching the concept of goal setting. To help them translate their thoughts into well-crafted goals, I’ve used the template below. It may help you in your goal-writing process as well.

Questions to ask: Are my goals…

Specific? 
Example: “I will eat healthy” is replaced with “I will eat five fruits or vegetables each day and limit french fries to once a week.”

Realistic?
Example: “I will run the Boston Marathon next week” is replaced with “I will complete my first 5K this summer.”

Well-rounded? 
Example: Choose goals that address the many parts of your life- health/fitness, social, spiritual, and educational/personal growth.

Mostly short-term?
Example: Goals like “I will be the President of the United States and win an Academy Award” should be kept to a limit. Instead fill your list with goals you can accomplish within the year.

After you and your family have crafted your personal goals, there are a few more steps to take to make the process more meaningful:

1. Write your goals down. This crystallizes them and gives them more power. 
Kid Tip: Kids can make their goal list special by decorating it. Use markers, glitter, stickers, etc. I’ve found that older kids like to cut out images from magazines and collage their goal list.

2. Tell someone. Studies have shown that you are more likely to achieve your goals if you tell your family and friends about them. During Family Goal-Setting Day, family members can choose one or two goals they don’t mind sharing aloud, then take turns reading them. 

3. Schedule a check-up. Designate a day in the future when you want to evaluate your progress. Mark it in red in your day planner. This will help to ensure all your good intentions don’t get lost in the shuffle of daily life. There are also goal-setting websites that will e-mail you a “check-up.” 
Kid Tip: Even tech-savvy kids like to receive old-fashioned mail. Help your kids address an envelope to themselves. Put a copy of their goals in the envelope. Tell them they will receive it sometime in the future, but they won’t know when. The unknown factor is fun for them. Will it catch them off-guard? How much will they have accomplished? Send it to them in the mail a month or two later. 

Wrap up Family Goal-Setting Day by doing something active together as a family. What a way to jump-start your success!
