Last week one of my students asked me if I could still do the splits. Still? Truth is, she was on to something. My splits aren’t what they used to be. As we age, our bodies become less flexible. Of course, the ability to do the splits isn’t necessary for those of us who aren’t cheerleaders or gymnasts. What is important, however, is the ability to maintain healthy mobility throughout our daily lives. Outlined below are a few select stretching positions that, if followed, will help you achieve this goal. Try them with your kids. Show them how flexible Mom (still) is.

A few things to keep in mind before you start:

The best time to increase your range of motion, and therefore your flexibility, is when your muscles are warm and more receptive to stretching. You’ll achieve the most success if you stretch after a workout.
Hold each stretch for 20 to 30 seconds.
Breathe in deeply though your nose, and exhale through your mouth.
Avoid “bouncing” while you stretch. Bouncing can actually lead the muscle to stiffen up rather than relax.
A stretch should be challenging but not painful. Listen to your body.
Upper Body

Pecs: With straight arms, clasp your hands behind your back. Focus on the image of squeezing your shoulder blades together. Pay special attention to your alignment. Make sure your neck isn’t protruding forward.
Deltoids: Extend your right arm across your chest. Use your left hand to pull your right arm inward towards your body. This is a good time to give your wrist joint a little TLC by rotating your right hand a few times. Switch arms.
Triceps: Raise your right hand over your head. Bend at the elbow and touch the middle of your back. Put your left hand behind your waist and attempt to clasp your right hand. If your hands don’t meet, you can use a small towel to make up the difference. Switch arms. One side is typically easier than the other.
Lower Body

Hamstrings: Sit on the floor with your legs extended in front of you. Pitch forward and try to touch your toes without bending your knees. If you can’t quite get there, reach for your ankles or shins and hold on. In time you’ll be able to move down to your feet.
Hip Flexors: This area of the body is activated throughout the day with each step we take, but it’s often forgotten when it comes time to stretch. While up on your knees, put one foot forward on the ground. Make sure that your knee is over your toes. Gently push your pelvis forward. If you continue to keep your knee over your toes, you will feel this stretch in the hip flexor area. Switch sides.
Glutes: Lie on your back. Bring your legs into a tabletop position, knees in the air. Place your right foot on your left knee. Clasp your hands behind your left knee and pull your leg towards your chest. It sounds more complicated than it is. Switch sides.

There are so many benefits to stretching—improved circulation, better posture, stress release, and injury prevention, to name a few. Yet when it comes to exercise, stretching often receives precious few minutes of our time. We hustle off the basketball court or hurry out of our dance class while our bodies are lucky to receive a mere calf stretch. As parents, we can teach our kids to make flexibility just as important as cardiovascular and strength training. When our kids see us stretching, they’re witnessing yet another way we take care of our bodies. The splits still might be a distant memory, but with a little practice, you might even be able to impress your kids!

