During the years I ran a youth fitness program at a large gym, I used to drive past a convenience store on my way to work. Everyday there would be dozens of teens sitting in front of the store chugging Slurpees and smoking cigarettes. I often thought about pulling over and handing out free passes to the gym, in hopes of giving them a healthier way to pass the time. But the thought of a bunch of unruly teens taking over the gym and annoying our adult members made me drive right on by. 

As the director of the youth program, it was my job to provide quality programming for kids and teens without turning the gym into a playground. The kids were easy- they were corralled in classes. But the teens were free to roam the gym independently. This often posed a problem, and a few complaints. I did require teens under the age of 16 to have a free session with a trainer then pass a rudimentary quiz before becoming a member. But I was amazed at how many parents balked at that requirement and insisted that their teen was somehow born ready. Perhaps the parents were so thrilled that their teens were choosing a healthy path, that they just wanted them to get started before they changed their minds. So if you find yourself in a similar situation, with a teen ready to hit the gym floor running, please take the time to pass on the following words of wisdom. The adults and the fitness director at the gym will appreciate it.

Share the equipment: When the gym floor is crowded, offer your piece of equipment up to the person waiting for a turn. Often called “working in,” both people take turns performing one set on the machine. By the same token, instead of hovering around waiting for someone to finish with a machine, it’s customary to ask, “Can I work in with you?”
Wipe your sweat: Yes, it seems obvious, but you’d be surprised. Most gyms provide small towels. Wipe up your sweat after your turn on both weight and cardio machines.
Re-rack your weights (quietly): When finished using free weights, slide them off the barbell and return them to the rack. This is more than common courtesy. It’s also to prevent injury to others. You never know who will be using the barbell next. It may be a senior citizen with a bad back.
Know your limits: Teens, especially boys, have a tendency to push their limits beyond what is safe. There is nothing more embarrassing than being stuck on the bench press because the weight is too heavy or flying off the back of a treadmill because the speed is too fast.
Act/Look the part: Gain the respect of the adult members and staff by using the equipment correctly, practicing proper form, and dressing in workout clothes. Specifically, leave the flip-flops at home.
Use discretion in the locker room: One of the most awkward complaints I ever received as youth fitness director was one about a group of girls laughing and pointing at the nude women in the locker room. Ideally, adults would cover up with a towel in the locker room. But when they don’t, keep your snickering to yourselves.
Point out to your teens that these guidelines aren’t here to “bring them down.” Quite the contrary. By following these rules of etiquette teens will feel more comfortable, confident and excepted at the gym, therefore increasing their chances of remaining a gym member. Incidentally, you may have noticed that these guidelines don’t necessarily only apply to teens. There are a few adults out there who could use a refresher course in gym etiquette. You know who you are…

