In last week’s installment of The Fit Family, we explored goal setting tips and techniques for the whole family. In case you’re in need of another fabulous goal to round out your list, look no further than this week’s column! As parents, we know it’s important to role model qualities like kindness, fairness, and patience. Children are also influenced by our daily habits such as personal hygiene and work ethic. What is often overlooked, however, is the impact our actions and attitudes can have on the health and fitness of our kids.

An alarming 32 percent of U.S. children are overweight or obese. (Odgden, Carroll and Flegal, 2008). Without intervention, these kids are in for a lifetime of potential medical problems ranging from type 2 diabetes  to sleep apnea—not to mention the social stigma that often accompanies obesity. Children who are not presently overweight are also affected by today’s couch potato culture. Fitness is not only defined by weight or body-fat percentage, but also by cardiovascular endurance, muscle tone, and flexibility. Many of today’s kids are sorely lacking in these areas. In other words, it may not show on the outside (due to genetics), but spending most days glued to the computer or watching TV comes with consequences not seen by the naked eye. 

Kids need inspiration to get up and move, especially those not comfortable playing competitive or team sports. They need role models. As parents, you can no longer rely on P.E. teachers to do the job—they’re being cut by struggling school districts. It’s up to you. The good news is it’s easy to be your child’s fitness role model.  To help you get started on one of your most important jobs as a parent, I’ve outlined a few suggestions:

Speak positively about your own exercise regimen around your kids. Your words and sentiments are powerful. Statements like, “I’m dreading my workout today” are just as influential as ones like “I can’t wait to break a sweat today.” Choose the right one.
Be knowledgeable about the latest studies on health and fitness, and impress your kids with the facts. They may roll their eyes and act disinterested, but they will see that you find the subject important enough to spend time learning about it.
Practice what you preach. Actually, don’t preach. When your child sees you make exercise part of your daily life, it does more to influence them than any preaching could ever do.
Set a fitness goal (to run a 5K, to lose 10 pounds, to kayak the length of your town’s lake, etc.) Tell your kids about your goal, and let them share in your joy when you accomplish it.
Flex your muscles- literally. Be confident about your body and it’s abilities around your kids.
Give your kids the opportunity to witness you enjoying exercise- whether it’s exercise done with friends, your spouse, or on your own.
This last one hits close to home for me. As a child I often had the opportunity to watch my mom revel in exercise. She was one of the first certified Jazzercise instructors back in the late 1970s and taught for twenty years. My sister and I used to hoist ourselves up on a milk crate on the YMCA playground to peek through the window and watch her lead her class. I witnessed the joy on her face during class and the sweat dripping off of her after class. As much as I hated to admit it during my teen years, my mom was my fitness role model. 

Do not underestimate the power you have to guide your kids down a healthy path. It starts with you!

