Recently I’ve noticed an upswing in the enrollment of ElectriKids’ after-school dance classes. I must specify that these dance classes are non-traditional. Kids show up in their regular school clothes. There are no mirrors, and students are encouraged to put their own style into the basic steps introduced during class. The increase in participation is great news since dancing is an effective tool in keeping kids healthy. It’s a cardiovascular and muscular workout that also emphasizes skills like balance, rhythm, and coordination—plus, it’s fun! What more could a kid want? 

From a very young age, most kids naturally respond to music by bouncing to the rhythm. Preschoolers will work themselves into a frenzy by dancing to a favorite song. As children mature, however, their ability to move freely to music often gets tempered by their growing inhibitions or their participation in traditional, structured dance classes.

One of the ways to battle this progression is to encourage an environment at home where it’s okay to “dance like no one’s looking.” In some households, ensuring your child’s room is stocked with some way to play music, whether it’s a CD player, MP3 player, or an old-fashioned radio. Those kids will push “play” and take it from there. Other kids might need a little more encouragement. The following is an outline of a method that’s been successful in getting kids (including boys!) to dance with creative, sweaty, abandon. Try it at home. You might discover a side to your child you haven’t seen before!

Thanks in part to shows like “So You Think You Can Dance?” moving to music is more popular than ever. Here’s a fun way to present your own version of a dance show at home.

Title: Dance Champs
Participants: Kids 6 years and older, parents

Step 1: Challenge the contestants to choreograph their own dance. The dance can be of any style, to any song, as long as it’s deemed “clean” by the parents.

Step 2: Contestants have to come up with a stage name, like Super Star or Dancing Machine. 

Step 3: Send the contestants to separate areas of the house to work on their dance. This process has no time limit. So if there is only one source of music in the house, kids can take turns working on their dance over the course of days or weeks. You can ensure they get plenty of exercise by stipulating they work on their dance for at least 30 minutes a day. 

Step 4: Monitor their progress and contribute some moves if they seem stuck. Most older kids can grasp the concept of the “8 count.” Once they are able to recognize it in the music, they feel like they’ve cracked a secret code and enjoy counting by eight when they choreograph. Younger children will have fun just dancing and lip-syncing to their favorite song. 

Step 5: Contestants create their costume by using items from around the house. Designate a show day and time. Build a sense of excitement by telling the dancers you can’t wait to see their works of art!

Step 6: It’s Show Day! Move the furniture and gather around to watch the Dance Champs hit the stage. Invite the neighbors. Make sure to use your best announcer voice when introducing them by their stage name. Parents can act as the “judges” and offer praise to each performer. 

Of special note: As a parent, you know your kids best. If the goal is to simply get them moving, a performance in front of an audience may not be the best approach. A more reasonable goal may be to work towards “taping day,” where you videotape the kids’ performances, and they get to watch themselves afterwards.
 
Step 7: After deliberating, the judges present the Dance Champ awards. Since the point of this whole exercise was to ensure kids have a positive experience moving to music, avoid choosing just one winner. Instead, each dancer wins an award for a different category. Some suggestions: Best Choreography, Best Dance Technique, Best Stage Presence, Most Energetic, Best Use of Music, Most Creative Performance.
