When our son started preschool this year, all our friends with kids warned us that he’d be bringing home more than finger paintings and macaroni sculptures. They were right. Ever since the day we dropped him and his mini backpack off at school last September, it seems as if he’s been bringing home a slew of colds, viruses, and other unwanted guests.

In many households, these germs start a chain reaction so that there’s always someone in the house who is sick, especially during the winter when we spend more time cooped up indoors. Some winter colds linger for weeks, making you wonder if you’ll be sick until spring arrives. For those of us who thrive on being active on a daily basis, it’s frustrating to spend days on end lying around nursing a cold. But should you exercise while sick? 

The most accepted rule of thumb is to determine whether your symptoms are above or below the neck. Affectionately known as the “neck check,” it’s a simple assessment appropriate for those with normally healthy immune systems. Fever, body aches, chills, and diarrhea are all deemed “below the neck” and indicators of the body’s need to rest. Exercising with any of these symptoms diverts your body’s resources from fighting your illness. Instead, you can compensate for your lack of exercise by making an extra effort to eat right.

However, if your symptoms are above the neck, such as congestion, runny nose, or scratchy throat, it is advisable to exercise—although at a reduced intensity level. It may even be beneficial. Illnesses often begin with fever and fatigue then progress into common cold symptoms. It’s during this time—the tail end of an illness—when exercise can help you feel more like yourself. A brisk walk can unclog your sinuses and invigorate your body. Dancing to your favorite music can raise your spirits and relieve stress. Just remember to exercise below your normal intensity level until you’re back in fighting form.

Other than consulting with a doctor, you are the best judge of what your body can handle when you're sick. Of course, this thought process is affected, to a degree, by how much you enjoy being active. If exercise is like doing your taxes or visiting the dentist for you, than the sniffles can be a convenient excuse to park yourself on the sofa for days. Something as simple as walking the dog will rev up your circulation, counteracting that sluggish, rundown feeling that often accompanies a cold. But people who already possess a low level of motivation to exercise will probably need more convincing before they trade in their fuzzy slippers for their sneakers.

On the other end of the spectrum, those of us who hate to miss a workout may overestimate how much our bodies can handle when we’re sick. Pushing your limits while sick can prolong your illness, and even be dangerous. For instance, exercising with a fever will increase your body temperature even higher. This puts your heart under strain as it fights to moderate your temperature. In extreme cases this can even cause an irregular heartbeat. So if your symptoms are “below the neck,” it’s best to become a couch potato with a good book or a movie marathon. Don’t even do any yoga during the commercial breaks. People in this category need to remember that rest is also beneficial for our bodies.
 
Of course, these lucky, highly motivated exercisers don’t have to perform the “neck check” quite as often as their counterparts. According to the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), people who exercise on a regular basis experience less illness. Workouts seem to boost the immune system. Yet another reason to be active!
