We all know it's important for kids to learn to read words. Did you
also know it's beneficial to teach kids to read their own body? Young
athletes develop a respect for their body that comes from knowing the
magnificent ways their body responds to the demands of exercise.
Studies have shown that kids who respect their body are less likely to
do things to harm their body, like smoke or use drugs. So it's
important that we, as parents and educators, teach kids a few simple
principles of exercise response. 

Don't worry—you won't be bogged down with the science. Kids learn best
by doing. So the next time your little ones are running on the soccer
field or taking the family dog for a walk, point out a few things
happening in the amazing machine that is their body. Use your kids'
natural love for exercise as a teaching opportunity. Here is a simple
guideline:

Imagine the body is a well-oiled machine, like a car. As it zooms
around the track, it stops at a few checkpoints along the way. 

Body Checkpoint #1
After the onset of activity, prompt your kids to stop briefly and
notice how their body feels. Ask them, "Do you feel warmer, like you
want to take your jacket off?" Or, "Do you feel like your body is
waking up?" Explain that their heart and lungs are stepping up to the
challenge of the activity. Blood is moving faster through out their
body, warming up their muscles.

Body Checkpoint #2
At the height of their workout, signal your kids to take notice of how
their body is responding to an even higher demand. By using the "Talk
Test," you can show them how hard their lungs are working. Here's how:
While exercising, ask your kids to sing a simple song or recite the
Pledge of Allegiance. They'll notice that their breathing is a little
labored in doing so—concrete evidence that they're working hard. During
intense exercise, you can direct them to put their hand over their
heart where they will be able to feel it pounding. Explain that their
heart is pumping blood, which carries oxygen to their working muscles.
(In a future column we'll explore ways kids can use math to check their
heart rate.) 

Body Checkpoint #3
It's important for kids to learn that sweating is a good thing. Some
kids actually avoid sweating because they associate it with being dirty
or stinky. Teach kids that the body is like a machine, and sweating is
its cooling system. Sweating prevents the machine from overheating.
Encourage kids to embrace sweating by saying, "If you're sweaty say hot
tamale!" or some other fun phrase. Also, give out high-fives for sweat.
Kids love to wipe their foreheads and give you a wet one. 

Body Checkpoint #4
To better understand how the muscles respond to exercise, instruct your
kids to do a wall sit. Here's how: Stand against a wall with feet hip
distance apart. Edge your feet away from the wall as you slide down
into a sitting position (without letting their bum touch the ground).
After thirty seconds or so, you'll feel a burning sensation in the
quads. That's your cue to stand up and stretch the quads. It's exciting
for kids to actually feel the muscles working. But even if kids aren't
doing a specific strength training exercise, like a wall sit, it's
still important to stretch the working muscles. Running around a
basketball court, for example, challenges many muscles in the body and
requires recovery stretching. To illustrate this concept, make a fist
to represent how a muscle looks when it's contracted. Imagine how
uncomfortable it would be to hold that tense position all day? Then
slowly open your hand to model how that muscle looks when it relaxes
into a stretch. 

Body Checkpoint #5
Ask your kids how they feel after completing their intense activity.
Relaxed? Proud of themselves? Happy? Those warm and fuzzy feelings are
easy to explain. Exercise releases endorphins in the body. Endorphins
are hormones that reduce stress and boost your mood. It's just another
fascinating way the body works. 

All these checkpoints will help you illustrate to your kids how "cool"
their body is. Of course, in the lexicon of kids, "cool" brings respect.

