When I was a kid I remember the thrill of taking off on my bike for hours around the neighborhood. My mom wouldn’t see me again until I returned home sweaty and wind-blown at the end of the day. I didn’t even know I was exercising. Our suburban streets were always crawling with kids. There were impromptu games of kickball, hopscotch, tag, and hide 'n' seek. When I walk along those same streets today, there are very few kids in sight. Where are all the kids playing? I reassure myself that they can’t all be sitting in front of the TV or computer. But to further investigate, I decided to interview some moms of school-aged children.

I began my quest in an upper-middle class neighborhood where I quickly learned the meaning of “the overbooked child.” Here’s a sample: Karate on Monday, chess on Tuesday, soccer on Wednesday, a scheduled playdate on Thursday, Boy Scouts on Friday, a soccer game on Saturday and church on Sunday. These poor moms are driving all over town while their kids never get a “day off.” To make matters worse, all this commuting often requires food on the go. Who has time to cook a healthy dinner when so much time is spent in traffic?

Why are so many parents falling into the busy trap? Most have good intentions. They feel that if their kids aren’t involved in a multitude of weekly activities, they’re not doing their job as parents. We always want to provide as many opportunities as we can for our kids. Others are secretly just “keeping up with the Jones’.” 

As an advocate for kids’ fitness, shouldn’t I be relieved to learn these kids are so active? Here’s the concern: A lot of kids, and their parents, are getting stressed-out. Kids need time to just chill, let their minds wander, and rejuvenate their spirit. If this sounds a little too “New Age,” note that child psychologists warn that over-scheduling your kids can put them at risk for anxiety, stress, and even depression.

Of course, the lack of kids playing outside isn’t always a result of tennis lessons and tutoring. Some parents feel their neighborhoods aren’t safe enough for outdoor play. Others cite the extraordinary amounts of homework kids receive these days. 

Whatever the reason, kids need time for unstructured play. There are many benefits to this, from less stress to more time to cultivate family relationships. But from the perspective of The Fit Family, kids need unscheduled time to develop the ability to be resourceful in finding ways to be active. When kids’ lives are dominated by adult-led activities, there is little time for self-discovery and creative exploration.  Some kids are so conditioned to only exercise at their lessons or practices that they don’t know what to do with themselves during free time. 

Kids will gain trust and confidence in their body’s abilities when they discover on their own what gets their hearts pumping and their endorphins racing. They will learn in which activities they excel and what makes them happy. By calling on their own resources to find creative ways to be active as kids, they’re building a foundation for an active lifestyle.  Here’s why: As they mature into teens and young adults, they may no longer have the luxury of after-school lessons and team sports. Academic pressures and financial obligations will become a reality. It’s important that kids know how to exercise without the guidance of adults. This is best done through good old-fashioned play. 

So as the new school year gets back into full swing, take some time to evaluate your kids’ extracurricular activities. Where can you cut back? Before adding any new activities to the schedule, ask your older kids to list three good reasons why they want to add the activity. Try trading it for a lesser-enjoyed activity. But most of all, practice saying this phrase, “Go outside and play!”
