Today’s fathers play a bigger role in their kids’ care and day-to-day lives than ever before. But let’s face it, in most families, it’s mom who knows when to schedule the next pediatrician appointment, where the missing toy is located, and how to best calm a tantrum. Even if all three of these things happen at once, it’s no problem, we’re masters at multi-tasking. Moms are also, in most cases, the nurturers—we’re the go-to-gal when boo-boos need kissing and feelings are wounded. But busy moms need to take time to mother themselves. Whether you call it self-care or “nurturing your inner goddess,” the goal is the same. By taking care of ourselves, we generate the energy and patience we need to be good parents. 

I’ve written in previous columns about the importance of modeling an active lifestyle. Kids who grow up with active parents will likely adopt those healthy behaviors. The same holds true for taking the time to nurture yourself. Kids need to learn that self-care is of value. Having the tools to handle stress will help them cope with life as they mature into teens and adults.

Now that the benefits of self-care are clear, what’s stopping so many moms from booking that massage or indulging in a facial? It’s that familiar monkey on our backs—guilt.  We feel guilty about spending time away from our kids, anxious about letting time pass without accomplishing something on our to-do list, and worried about spending money during this shaky economy. 

If the theory that nurturing yourself makes you a better parent is not enough to steer you to the spa, never fear. I have the perfect remedy for all you guilt-ridden moms out there. As a HealthNews.com reader, I assume you value your health and make time to exercise regularly. The good news is there are ways to bundle your pampering with your workout, ensuring a luxurious, guilt-free experience!

Massage
The benefits of massage are well known. But if the idea of being rubbed down with oils still sounds too indulgent, book a 30-minute sports massage and consider it part of your workout routine. Sports massage is no longer just reserved for competitive athletes. It’s catered to anyone who exercises. During a sports massage, the therapist hones in on a fatigued or problem area of the body, such as tight hamstrings or sore shoulders. The session also includes passive stretching exercises. I recently had a sports massage after a particularly taxing Pilates class. As the therapist helped to stretch my fatigued hamstrings, I considered it an extension of my workout. I’ve never had such a guilt-free massage! For a massage that incorporates even more vigorous stretching, try a Thai massage. Think of it like a yoga class. 

Salt Scrub
When you receive a total body salt scrub at a spa, you’re doing more than just exfoliating dead skin. Sometimes we forget that our skin is the largest organ of our body. Sea salt is well known for its ability to relieve aches and pains, reduce stiffness after exertion, and relax the muscles. When the magnesium sulfate in sea salt is absorbed through the skin, it draws toxins from the body, sedates the nervous system, and reduces swelling. The high mineral content of Dead Sea salt, specifically, actually stimulates circulation. So change the way you view a salt scrub. It’s more than just a treatment to get your skin beach-ready. It’s another way active women can take care of their body.

Spa Day
Spending a day at the spa is expensive. But there is a way to use the spa to rejuvenate your mind and body without all the guilt. Find a spa that will let you purchase a day pass for the use of their amenities, like the sauna, steam room, Jacuzzi, and simple peace and quiet. Go there after a good workout. Better yet, consider it part of your workout.
