As the mom of a three year old, I can relate to the "there's not enough hours in the day" excuse for not exercising. I've used it a few times myself. How can I possibly squeeze in time for a workout when there is laundry to fold and dinner to make? Am I a terrible mother if I skip my son's music class to make it to my Cardio Step class? There's a tenuous balancing act happening in households across America. Somehow we have to carve out time for ourselves in a day packed with other responsibilities.

It's easier to master this balancing act by weeding through a few common exercise myths. These myths act as roadblocks to our exercise success. We're usually tired, so it's tempting to turn to one of these myths as a reason to skip a workout. Here they are:

Myth #1 The best time to exercise is in the morning.
At the end of the day when your choice is to work out or plop down in front of the television, you might rely on this myth to make your decision. "I'll just wait until tomorrow since it's better to workout in the morning." Truth is, the best time to workout is any time you have the time. There's no reliable evidence to suggest that calories are burned more efficiently at certain times of day. Your body's circadian rhythm determines whether you're a night owl or an early bird, and there's not much you can do to alter it. So if you can't fathom breaking a sweat before your morning coffee, hop on the treadmill after the kids go down at night. Exercise at the time of day that feels the most natural to you. You'll exercise harder and more consistently.

Myth #2 You have to choose between family time and exercise time.
You probably know this one well. While it is important to take time for yourself, it's not always possible on a daily basis. Your kids can become convenient reasons not to exercise. You get so caught up in cooking , chauffeuring, and cleaning up after them that you forget you can also exercise with them. True, you might not be able to reach the intensity level you yearn for when the kids are along, but it's no reason to skip it all together. (Check The Fit Family archives for family workout ideas.) So the next time you find yourself struggling to balance time to exercise and quality time with the kids, combine the two.

Myth #3 To reap the benefits, you must exercise for at least 30 minutes.
It's time to get logical. It doesn't make sense to skip exercise entirely just because you only have time for ten or fifteen minutes. That ten or fifteen minutes is better than nothing! Moving just a little every day can improve your overall health and metabolic functions. Doing short (10-15 minute) high-intensity exercise sessions builds strength and burns calories. But it really comes down to common sense. When you're debating whether or not to squeeze in fifteen minutes of exercise before the kids come home from school, don't fall victim to this myth. Some is always better than none!

It's now 10 p.m. My son's in bed, the dog has been fed, and this column is finished. Time to put on my workout clothes.

