There are those that say we are raising a generation of wimps; we’re too worried about our kids’ safety and self-esteem these days. Those same people might believe kids aren’t receiving enough opportunities to be competitive. But more kids than ever are participating in team sports, and at a younger age. The problem is that many of those kids are not continuing to lead active lives once they outgrow their jerseys. 

Kids do benefit from athletic competition: learning to work as a team, striving towards a shared goal, learning to win graciously and to lose with dignity. But when should they start competing and how much is too much? 

Experts agree that most children do not have the cognitive, emotional, and social maturity to benefit long-term from competitive sports until middle school. When winning is overemphasized during physical activity, young children run the risk of lower self-esteem and early burn-out. I still cringe when I reminisce about my days playing on a youth soccer team during elementary school. My father meant well, but running up and down the sidelines while screaming “Be aggressive!” didn’t help to create a positive experience. I only lasted a couple seasons. 

Like a lot of young children, I would have much more enjoyed the activity of playing soccer if I knew the outcome didn’t matter so much. When designing my youth fitness classes, I’m always mindful of ways to minimize competition. Kids already engage in so many competitive activities, whether in school, at home, or on the playing field. When it comes to exercise, I want to give them the opportunity to enjoy the experience, not worry about the outcome. 

Some of you may coach your child’s sports team or lead other youth activities. I’d like to share with you a few of the strategies I use in class to minimize competition. 

Downplay It
For young children, four to seven years, it often works to simply downplay your response during a competitive game. When you quickly move on to the next contestant without announcing who the winner is, young kids just move along with you. It helps to have music playing in the background.
Example: Instead of clarifying who the winner was in a running race, just shout out “Great job! Who wants a turn next?” Kids will focus on being chosen for the next turn rather than deciphering who won the last race.

Eliminate “Outs”
Since it’s my goal to keep kids moving, it doesn’t make sense to have kids “sit out” for not playing up to par. So instead of calling “outs,” devise a silly “penalty” the players must do to stay in the game.
Example: If players touch the stick during Limbo, instead of sitting out for the rest of the game they have to dance the Macarena or try to do the splits to join in again. The game ends not with a sole winner, but when everybody has had plenty of turns.

Encourage Self-Competition
This strategy satisfies the more competitive kids without changing the experience for the other kids. The players keep track of their own points and try to beat their own score.
Example: For an obstacle course, the kids have a choice to be timed or run through it without being timed. The kids who choose to be timed learn their time when you whisper it to them. On their next turn they can try to beat their time.

Beat the Music
Encourage teamwork by challenging the kids to complete a task before a song ends. 
Example: This strategy comes in handy during relay races. Instead of the teams competing against each other, they’re competing as a group against the music. All lines must be finished before the song ends. This eliminates all the accusations of cheating that often interrupt a fun activity, but also inspires kids to strive toward victory. Who wants to be beaten by a lousy song? 

This doesn’t mean young kids should never play competitive team sports. Just be mindful of the amount and intensity. Strike a balance between competitive games and open-ended activity. Make sure they can experience the sheer joy of movement without the consequence of winning or losing.
