I'm on the road again this summer. If you've read my bio on Health News, you know my husband is a touring musician. My son and I are meeting him in different cities around the country. From touring with him in the past, I got the idea to take my own show on the road and created the ElectriKids Muscle Mania Tour in 2001. Through the Tour I lead interactive fitness assemblies in school gymnasiums and auditoriums. During the assembly we talk about why it's important to exercise and engage in a heart-pumping 30-minute workout. As we roll through the heartland on the band's tour bus today, I'm reminded of all the interesting people I've had the pleasure of meeting on my own Tour.

Since most schools are short on funding, I often stay in the home of a parent or teacher to eliminate my hotel expenses. My husband's not thrilled with this idea, but I've found staying with a family while in an unfamiliar town to be much more enriching than crashing in the local motel. In homes from New York to Nebraska, I've been welcomed to the dinner table and treated to many slices of American life. Here is a sample of some of my experiences:

No School!! 
During a stop in northern Kentucky, this San Diego girl experienced her first Snow Day. I was staying with a nice family who left California for a better life in a more affordable part of the country. I woke to the sound of the kids running down the hallway shouting "No School!" But if you think that means the kids spent the entire day inside playing video games, I'm happy to report all the kids in the neighborhood were outside playing in the snow. Since I was going to miss my workout that day at the school, I borrowed some boots and joined in the fun.

The Power of Prayer
I'm not a very religious person, but while staying with a Christian family in Washington State, I was truly moved by prayer. In making the decision to stay in the homes of strangers, I knew I had to be open-minded to different lifestyles. But when the family first gathered around me to pray for me, I have to admit I felt a little uneasy. I wasn't used to such heartfelt sentiment from people I barely knew. My memory of the youngest child in the family praying for my safe travels follows me to this day. 

Moms Should Rule the World
Most of the time I've spent on the road with ElectriKids was before I became a mother. In households across America I've watched moms somehow get everyone (including me) up, dressed, fed, and out the door on time. I remember feeling a little intimidated by their organization and energy. How was I going to pull that off? From the cancer-survivor dynamo mom in Massachusetts to all the other moms I met pulling double duty as P.E. teachers: You inspire me!

The Greene Family
Long before "going green" was the cool thing to do, I stayed with a family in northern California that was way ahead of the game. We shared a home-cooked vegetarian meal. It was great to see the kids chow down on kale and lentils. Everything not consumed was composted. All was going well until I was shown to my room in a guest house without indoor plumbing. I was instructed to use the "camper toilet" in my room. For the uninitiated, a camper toilet is like a potty chair for grown-ups. Needless to say, I waited to use the bathroom at the school.

When in Rome...
To make my travels more meaningful, I try to sample the local cuisine whenever possible. My hosts are always proud to show off their town's popular haunts. Some highlights: authentic Italian food in New Jersey, spicy barbeque in Texas, and a decedent, creamy dessert common to the Midwest: frozen custard. If you can hunt some down in your part of the country, I recommend you indulge! 

The Muscle Mania Tour has enabled me to meet people from all walks of life, but all have one thing in common: the desire to encourage kids to be healthy and fit. The families that have opened their homes to me have enriched my life, and I look forward to meeting more in the years to come.

