As parents, one of the best gifts we can pass on to our kids is a genuine love for exercise. Being active daily has so many benefits beyond improved physical health. Life is full of ups and downs. We now know exercise can boost our mood and self esteem, helping us get through hard times. Exercise also helps us maintain a healthy weight as we age. All of these things contribute to a better quality of life. 

It's important to distinguish between motivating your kids to exercise and instilling in them a love for exercise. Motivation can come in many forms, some of which are not beneficial in the long run. Some parents use exercise charts with their kids, where exercise fits somewhere between cleaning their room and doing the dishes. In other words, it's like a chore. Others sign their kids up for every class or sports team in town, hoping that an instructor or coach can get the job done. But we all know it's a parent who makes the most impact on a child.

The key to instilling a love for exercise in your children is to raise your kids in a way where exercise conjures up feelings of enthusiasm, success, and family togetherness. Here's how:

Be a Good Role Model
This goes beyond having your kids see you exercise. It's about your attitudes regarding exercise and how it makes you feel. When your kids hear you grunt and groan about having to go for a jog, they get the impression that working out is a drag, or a necessary evil, perhaps. But when your kids see you light up about your latest workout, they get quite a different impression. So the key is to do what you love, and let your kids know how great it makes you feel. Before a challenging bike ride, share with them the route you plan to take and your excitement about the prospect of beating your best time. After your favorite aerobics class, verbally express what a good workout you got and how much fun you had. Exaggerate a little, for good measure. They will notice.

Use Exercise As a Reward, Not Punishment
It's always bothered me when I've seen other kids' fitness instructors or coaches use exercise as a punishment for various offenses. "You're late to class—give me 20 push-ups." Or, "Losing team runs laps!" Using exercise as a form of punishment goes against the very concept we're trying to teach. Instead, try turning this technique on its head—use exercise as a reward. Make a list of active outings your kids like to do, such as a trip to the batting cages or the community pool. The next time they come home with good grades or do all their chores, reward them with one of the activities from the list. Think about how much healthier America's kids could be if adults rewarded them with a fun activity rather than a new video game or a wad of candy.

Create Active Family Memories 
One of the questions I always ask my students is "What is your favorite way to workout with your family?" The kids light up as they tell me about their family bike rides, hikes, soccer matches, and various other activities. Some of my favorite memories are of my family and I moving the furniture and dancing in the living room. It warmed my heart yesterday when I went to pick up my son from my mom's house and walked in to find the two of them dancing in the living room. Both toddler and Grandma were laughing and shiny with sweat. The legacy continues. 

So take the lead in initiating active family fun. It can be as simple as walks after dinner or as involved as flag football with homemade jerseys and a scoreboard. Either way you'll be creating memories that will last a lifetime.

