We all get into workout ruts. You know the feeling. Your favorite aerobics class is a little stale after one too many knee lifts. The stationary bike in your bedroom begins to look better as a clothes hanger. Like anything else in life, we have to make an effort to keep things fresh. Interval Training is a fun and easy way to stir up your workout. It's perfectly suited for the outdoors and (almost) the whole family.

A typical workout follows a modified bell curve. It begins with a warm-up and a gradual increase in aerobic intensity. That level of intensity is maintained for at least fifteen minutes. A cool-down follows. In contrast, interval training resembles a peaks and valleys formula. After a short warm-up, you perform 1-2 minutes of intense activity such as sprinting. This is your peak interval. Your valley interval, 1-2 minutes of low intensity exercise, immediately follows. This up and down cycle is repeated for 30 to 45 minutes, depending on your level of fitness.

Now for the fun part: Rallying the kids and taking interval training outdoors. Arm the kids with a stopwatch, which they love, and head out to your local park, beach, or walking trail. Make sure the kids are dressed to workout, with proper athletic shoes. This will help them understand that this adventure is more than just a leisurely day at the park. One of the best things about bringing the kids along is that they can buffer your embarrassment if you're timid about performing exercises out in public. You may feel more comfortable doing jumping jacks in the park when you're joined by a couple of kids doing the same.

There is one caveat about the kids: Outdoor interval training is best suited for school-age kids. Babies tucked into a baby jogger will enjoy the outdoors and add to your workload, but you'll have to replace your sprinting with jogging for safety reasons. Preschool-age kids lack the physical maturity needed for the challenge. During your sprint, you might leave your toddler in the dust! 

Exercising outdoors helps you and your kids get in touch with nature. Encourage the kids to be mindful of the fresh air they're breathing as they're exercising. Point out interesting scenery along the way. The outdoors also provides ready-made equipment for your workout. Trees, large rocks, park benches, retaining walls, stairs, can all be put to use.

Sample Family Outdoor Interval Training Workout:

(All intervals are for 1-2 minutes. Peak intervals are marked with an *)

Warm-up by walking at a gentle pace (5 minutes) 
*Sprint (Run with abandon, like you did when you were a kid.) 
Balance walk on the raised edge of a sandbox or curb. Hold your arms out to the sides to engage the deltoid muscles and aid in balance. 
*Sprint 
Lift and lower your heels for standing calf raises. 
*Use a fallen tree branch or strip of beach seaweed. Jump over it from side to side repeatedly. 
Walk backwards 
*Sprint 
Use a strong tree trunk or the back of a park bench for modified push-ups. 
*Choose two large objects to tag, such as two trees, a few yards apart. Shuffle sideways between the two trees, tagging each tree. 
Use a park bench or large rock for triceps dips 
*Sprint 
Walk while rolling the shoulders 
Stretch 
Any of these activities can be substituted by something you or your kids devise, as long as a high intensity interval is followed by a low intensity interval, and so on. Let your kids get creative and utilize your surroundings. Outdoor Interval Training can help you improve cardiovascular fitness, burn more calories, break-through a plateau, and expand your workout options. By bringing the kids along you'll help them bond with nature and release energy. In turn, they will help you feel more comfortable while hopping like a rabbit in the park.

