The lazy, hazy days of summer are beckoning. As you adjust your thermostat for the rising temperature, remember to adjust your workout program, too. During exercise in normal climates, your body temperature rises about 2 to 3 degrees. Even during high-intensity exercise, there are mechanisms in your body that prevent you from becoming overheated. But adding extreme heat to the mixture will throw the whole equation off. Here are a few things to keep in mind when you and your family exercise in the heat:

Begin exercise gradually: It takes about a week for your body to get acclimated to exercising in higher-than-normal heat. Until then you will need to curtail the intensity and length of your workout. 
Kid Tip: Children sweat less than adults during exercise in hot weather. Since sweating helps to release the body's heat, kids have a more difficult time getting used to exercising in hot climates. Overzealous little ones will need an adult to closely monitor their exercise intensity.

Wear light-colored, cotton clothing: Cotton fabrics allow your body to release the internal body heat created by exercise better than synthetic fabrics. Lighter-colored fabrics reflect the sun better than darker shades. 
Drink extra water: Prevent dehydration and heat exhaustion by drinking small amounts of water at regular intervals during exercise. Drink a larger amount of water after your workout to replenish your body. 
Kid Tip: Although plenty of adults forget to drink water during exercise, kids especially need reminding. Often they're having so much fun, stopping for water seems like a hassle. Encourage them to drink a small cup of water about every 15 minutes.

Pay attention to the heat index: A high temperature combined with high humidity poses the most stressful condition for your body during exercise. There are web sites that can help you determine your daily heat index. It's best to exercise indoors with air conditioning on days when the heat index is high. 
Don't forget air quality: Smog isn't just in L.A. anymore. High temps often bring poor air quality to many urban areas. Exercise earlier in the morning to reduce breathing the build-up of airborne pollutants. 
Have fun with water play: Head to the beach, jump in the pool, run in the sprinklers. When those options aren't available, get creative with squirt bottles and water balloons. By incorporating water play into your family workouts, you'll better enjoy the summer season. 
Fun Tip: Here's a fun way to play with water balloons that transcends the traditional water balloon toss or water balloon fight. Let your kids set up an obstacle course in the backyard. Each family member takes a turn going through the course while holding a water balloon, careful not to break it. At the end of the course is a hula hoop on the ground that acts as a target. When the participants step inside the hoop, they choose how they want to burst the balloon. The timid can throw it on the ground inside the hoop. The more adventurous can squish it under their armpit or break it over their head. Songs like "Splish Splash" or "Wipeout" add to the fun. Summer doesn't get much better than that!

