Families around the world will gather around the television to watch the 2008 Summer Olympics. The Games provide a unique peek into the lives of elite athletes. We watch them push their limits and defy gravity. We see them lose gracefully and beam with national pride. What an opportunity for kids to be inspired for greatness without all the bravado and commercialism of today's professional sports.

Many elementary schools I've visited hold their own version of the Summer Olympics. Kids train all week long for the big competition on Friday. Along the way they learn self-discipline, determination, good sportsmanship, and patriotism—all while getting a good workout. 

You can recreate some of the Olympic events in your own backyard. Here's how:

Kick things off with the Opening Ceremony. You can download the Olympic theme song and play it as the kids parade around the backyard. If you really want to go all out, the kids can create their own flags to wave as they walk. Next, explain the competitions that will be involved and their rules. Finish with the Olympic motto. You can choose "Citius, Altius, Fortius," which is Latin for "Swifter, Higher, Stronger," or another famous Olympic motto, "The most important thing is not to win but to take part."

I've chosen to highlight events that don't require teams. That way small families or even families with just one child can participate. As parents, you can determine if it's appropriate for the participants to compete against each other. To minimize family friction, you may want to instead encourage self-competition, where the participants compete against themselves by trying to beat their own records.

The Long Jump
You'll need: a jump rope to mark the starting line and a tape measure to determine distance
Tip: Remind the kids to make a safe landing by keeping their knees slightly bent

Gymnastics
You'll need: a soft grassy area or a gymnastics mat, a long 2 x 4 to act as a balance beam, score cards
Tips: Let the kids get creative with their gymnastics routine, but limit their time to 1 minute. Adults should act as the judges. Music adds to the fun.

Discus
You'll need: a large hula hoop, a heavy plastic Frisbee, tape measure
Tips: Spin and throw the Frisbee while standing inside the hoop. If the Frisbee goes too far to use the tape measure, use landmarks in the yard to determine distance. Watch out for the neighbor's windows!

Sprinting
You'll need: a jump rope to mark the starting line, a stopwatch, crepe paper
Tip: Use the crepe paper as a finish line. The kids will have a blast breaking through it.

You can also try variations on the shot put, javelin throw, swimming events, cycling, or triathalon (with a much-reduced distance for each leg of the race).

Your Games wouldn't be complete without a Closing Ceremony. You can make your own medals to award the athletes with ribbon, poster board and foil. But feel no guilt if you just pick up a few ribbons from a party supply store instead. You just held your first family Olympics--that was a feat in itself! End your special day by revisiting the Olympic motto, "Swifter, Higher, Stronger." These were the words that encouraged the kids to give their best effort during the competition. Remind them that striving for personal excellence is a worthwhile goal for everyone. Congratulate your little athletes for pushing their limits.

