Exercise is only half of the equation when it comes to raising healthy kids. It's much easier for some parents to get their kids to run a 5K than it is to eat a balanced meal. Our bodies naturally crave sugar, salt, and fat. Newborn babies often have to be given sweet sugar water to initiate the sucking response that leads to nursing. As kids mature, they're bombarded with advertisements for junk food and tempted by their classmates' Cheetos and Oreos. So how do we encourage healthy eating habits when both biological and environmental factors get in our way? Here are a few tips:

Sound the Alarm
This is a technique I've used with my students for years. During after-school snack time, I sit and talk with them about their day. When I notice one of them is eating a healthy snack, I blurt out, "Ding Ding Ding! Healthy snack alert! Healthy snack alert!" while pointing to the nutritious choice. Like clockwork, the next day's snack time is filled with kids proudly unveiling their healthy snacks. Some kids can't wait to show me. Others quietly unwrap their snack with a sly look on their face, knowing they're about to be praised. Try this at home with your young children when they independently choose a healthy snack. Use my "Ding Ding Ding!" routine or come up with one of your own. The more fanfare the better!

The Family Table
You've heard this before. Kids in families that sit down to dinner together have healthier eating habits than kids who eat in front of the T.V. or on their own. The challenge is making this happen when our lives are so busy. The good news is that convening for dinner just a few nights a week makes a difference in kids' eating habits. To make those few weekly dinners count, serve healthy, but kid-friendly, food. You don't want to spend your cherished time at the family table fighting your kids. Instead prepare food they like with healthy adjustments. Substitute regular pasta with whole wheat, high fiber pasta. Dice vegetables and hide them in sauces. Use lean meats and avoid processed food. If your kids like salad, on busy nights you can get a variety of salads to-go from a local restaurant or market. Have a family "Taste Test" to determine which salad is the favorite. Don't forget to role model portion control and the art of conversation.

Start Digging
According to the Journal Of the American Dietetic Association, children will eat more fruits and vegetables when they are served homegrown produce. Planting a garden with your kids is not only great exercise, it's a way for them to become truly involved with their food choices. They get to see the process from beginning to end. After planting and cultivating carrots or strawberries, for example, your kids will anxiously await their ripening, eager to take their first bite. But if you're like me, and the thought of planting a garden sounds intimidating and unrealistic, become well-acquainted with your local farmer's markets. It's not as good as growing your own, but you can reap similar benefits from buying your fruits and veggies at the farmer's market by getting a little creative. Begin by outfitting your kids with a basket they can hold while shopping. It's more meaningful for them to bring home the goods in a special basket than in boring plastic bags. Challenge your kids to collect fruits and veggies of five different colors. Give kudos to the kid that can seek out a fruit or vegetable that the family has never eaten before. Finally, include the kids in the washing and preparation of their healthy purchase.

Like instilling a love for exercise in your kids, it's easier to create healthy eaters if you start them on the path when they're young. But it's never too late make a positive impact on your kids' eating habits. By making a few lifestyle changes, you can improve the way your family eats. Of course, you might have to start with your spouse first!

