Circuit Training is a great way to get the whole family up and moving. If you’re not familiar with the nuts and bolts of circuit training, it’s best described as a series of pre-set exercise stations. The participants rotate around to each station every minute or so. Upbeat music may play in the background. Many of the popular women’s exercise facilities popping up around town are based on the circuit-training concept. 

In a gym setting, circuit training usually involves hydraulic exercise machines. But the beauty of circuit training is that it easily translates to any environment. All it takes is a little creativity. Periodically in this column I’ll introduce a new circuit-training course you can try with your kids at home. All of the circuits will include cardiovascular, strength training, and coordination stations. But first it’s important to point out a few differences between successful kids’ circuits and those created solely for adults. 

As you can imagine, a kids’ circuit has to be more fun. Although adults like to have fun while exercising, for kids, fun is their prime motivator. So it’s necessary to include stations like hula hooping, sock skating, and juggling. (Besides, how fun is it to watch dad try to hula hoop!) 
Since kids have a shorter attention span, it’s better to rotate stations more frequently. Instead of having a set time at each station of one minute, I let the enthusiasm level of my students help determine when it’s time to change stations. At the first flicker of boredom- it’s time. Usually it’s at about 20 seconds. 
More equipment is needed for a kids’ circuit. An adult circuit can survive with stations like jumping jacks or push-ups that are simply marked with an orange cone. But kids are very hands-on learners. Part of the excitement of going to the next station involves picking up and exploring the awaiting equipment. The equipment also helps to define what to do at the station. 
The entire family can be involved in the preparation of the family circuit. All of the circuits that will be presented here can be set up in your family room or backyard. Make it a family effort to move a little furniture if needed. Let your kids help create a song playlist. The challenge is finding ten songs that everyone likes that are consistently upbeat (about 130 bpm). 

Much of the equipment needed for a family circuit can be found at home. The rest, if desired, can be purchased at sporting goods or toy stores. In case you’re feeling inspired and want to start building your family circuit arsenal now, the following is a list of items I like to use in my kids’ circuits:

Store-bought Equipment

Hula hoops 
Jump ropes 
Foam noodles (often used in swimming pools) 
Orange cones 
Bean bags 
Medicine ball 
2-3 lb. soft-coated hand weights 
Exercise tubing 
Plastic bouncy balls (the kind from the drug-store) 
Items from Home

Canned food 
Paper plates 
Stuffed animal toys 
Beach towels 
Bubble wrap 
Scarves 
Blue painter’s tape 
Balloons 
Pillows 
Chair 
Wondering what we’re going to do with the canned food and bubble wrap? Check in next week to receive the outline for the first in a series of fun Family Circuits.

