For years the fitness industry has recommended that children refrain from weight training until after puberty. There was concern that resistance training would damage the body's growth plates and stunt a child's musculoskeletal development. Recent research, however, has shown that kids actually benefit from a strength training program. Still not convinced? Both the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Sports Medicine support youth strength training-as long as it's done correctly.

A well-crafted strength training program can improve a young athlete's performance on the field or on the court. But what's most exciting to me, as a kids' fitness crusader, are the benefits non-athletic kids can receive from a basic strength training program. Here's what a well-designed program can do for your child:

Increase muscular strength and endurance 
Strengthen bones 
Boost metabolism 
Improve self-esteem and body image 
Young children can increase their muscular strength and endurance by using their own body weight. Push-ups, wall-sits, and hanging from the monkey bars are examples. But when is a child ready for weight training? Since kids develop differently, there isn't a set age to make this determination. So here is your first guideline: Once kids demonstrate enough body awareness to understand the concept of proper form, external weight can be added. (See my column on Body Awareness). Proper form is the fundamental first step of weight training for both kids and adults. It prevents injuries and ensures that you get the most out of the exercise. Before I give my students exercise tubing for bicep curls, I have them demonstrate what bicep curls look like without the added resistance. 

After kids have mastered proper form, the next rule for youth weight training is to not confuse it with weightlifting. Boys especially will want to push the (heavy) envelope. They often want to compete with their friends to see who can lift the most weight. Your child must have the maturity to understand that the goal is to lift a reasonable amount of weight correctly, not strain to lift the most weight possible. When I ran a youth program at a gym, I often had to educate parents on this issue. Too many parents wanted to set their teens free in the gym environment when they weren't ready.

When kids understand proper form and have the maturity to determine their reasonable amount of resistance, they are ready for a strength training program. It's important, though, that all kids engaging in weight training have a well-informed adult as a workout partner. Often called a spotter, this adult ensures that the exercises are done properly. If you have experience with strength straining, you could be your child's spotter. What a cool way to bond with your child!

I view weight training as another tool in my arsenal of healthy activities for kids. In my work with ElectriKids, I emphasize modes of exercise that don't require a team of players or a scheduled game. Done correctly, weight training can become a healthy habit that lasts a lifetime. 

