Ideally, kids should be getting at least 30 minutes of moderate intensity cardiovascular activity daily. I’m also a believer in allocating at least 30 minutes of family time each day. But between school, homework, after school lessons, and busy working parents, it’s tough to do both. And what about your workout? Hah! That’s been on the back burner for weeks, right? 

How can you also get a workout in when you're strapped for time and committed to spending quality time with your family? Make that time active! Studies have shown that little bursts of activity are better than nothing at all when it comes to your overall health. 

Here's how to do it:

I’ve taken three normally sedentary family pastimes, and given them a slight jolt of activity.

1. Board Game Bop

Since my son is only 2 years old, we haven’t yet had the opportunity to play a board game as a family. I have so many fond memories of doing this as a kid- gathering around the table, setting up the games, laughing at the look on my Dad’s face when we "sunk his battleship." In addition to playing the incredible video games available today, I hope families still get together and play games like Chutes and Ladders or Go Fish. Assuming I’m not too behind the times, here is a way to energize your next family board game night. 

 

Predetermine actions for specific game pieces or destinations. For example, every time that you land on a yellow-colored space, do 10 jumping jacks while singing your favorite song. 
Act out instructions. If the directions say to move two spaces forward, move two spaces forward while jogging in place for 2 minutes. 
Give bonus points. For example, each player may be able to earn an additional space if they could run around the house twice before it's her or his turn again. 
Add exercise rules--For example, when a player rolls doubles, she or he chooses her or his favorite exercise for all players to do. 
Your kids may think of their own active modifications to your favorite games or even create an entire fitness board game from scratch.

2. TV Tango

Let’s face it; in many households, the most common way families come together is to watch TV. I know that’s true in my family. Here’s how to get the family off the couch. 

Each person in the family gets a turn to choose a dance move or exercise that the whole family does during the commercial break of a show. Maybe everyone does “The Twist”, or hops on one foot. You can use the sofa for tricep dips, or the bottom stair of the staircase for calf raises. The second the show returns from the commercial break, everybody rushes back to the den and plops back down in front of the tube. The family member that chose the activity then chooses a stretch or two that everyone holds until the next commercial break. Kids will love to see how flexible (or stiff!) their parents are. 

3. Homework Hoedown

So many kids learn better by "doing". Homework time poses a great opportunity to test this theory. Scientists are now studying the link between exercise and cognitive learning in kids. It makes sense. How many times have you been frustrated as your child drifts into a daze during homework at the kitchen table? Here’s the lift you need to put the spark back into family homework time.

Arrange your child’s addition or multiplication flash cards in a circle on the floor. Play an upbeat family favorite song, like "I Like to Move It" from the movie Madagascar. All of you skip around the circle until you pause the music. The players must then pick up the card they are standing near, and recite the equation to a rhythm. For example: While clapping and hopping to a beat, “Five times five is twenty-five.” Then push play and start skipping again.

For spelling homework, try standing up and making the letters with your body. “Give me an A!” for example. Of course, there are some homework subjects that don’t easily correspond to activity. In that case, set a timer to ring every 20 minutes or so. At that time, all of you take one lap around the house. Use music to make it more fun. Finish with a quick stretch and a deep breath - then it’s back to business.

There’s a wealth of family workout ideas out there, many of which we’ll discuss here in future columns. But when time is limited and you find yourself struggling to choose between family time and workout time, combine the two. Even better, let your kids organize and lead one of the activities I’ve listed here. Empower them to be in charge of keeping their family fit.

