Lately we've been bombarded with news stories about how unfit America's kids are today, yet very few schools offer P.E. to their students on a daily basis. Many elementary school kids have P.E. only once a week. Some educators blame the federally mandated program, No Child Left Behind, for forcing schools to cut programs like music and P.E. to make room for extra math and reading time. Is P.E. still important in a world where test scores mean everything? 

Much of my work with kids involves the Muscle Mania Tour, interactive fitness assemblies that I lead in schools across America. During the assembly we talk about why it's important to exercise and engage in a heart-pumping 30-minute workout. When I receive requests from PTA parents and teachers to bring the Muscle Mania Tour to their school, I'm always encouraged by their enthusiasm for kids' health and fitness. With P.E. being cut in so many schools, today's kids need those kinds of advocates rooting for them.

Recently a PTA mom had to reluctantly back out of an assembly because her school's principal wouldn't allow "any time spent away from class unless it raises test scores." I was taken aback. I realize there must be a lot of pressure on school administrators to boost test scores. But it was disappointing to see a principal so misinformed about the latest research, with such a short-sighted view of what's best for kids.

Current research shows physical activity does improve academic performance. Studies have shown that schools offering intense physical activity programs have seen a positive effect on test scores in math, reading, and writing. Those same schools also show a reduction in disruptive classroom behavior (Journal of School Health). It makes sense. Kids need to blow off steam in order to concentrate. For many kids, especially girls, recess isn't enough because much of it is spent in sedentary ways like playing board games or waiting in line for a quick turn at handball. 

The long-term benefits of a comprehensive school P.E. program are also exciting. In addition to all the obvious ways kids benefit from exercise-the prevention of obesity and Type 2 Diabetes, improved overall health-there are other perks that will help them their entire academic career. According to the U.S. Department of Education, physical activity programs can help kids develop skills important to academic performance, such as self-discipline, teamwork, and leadership. Participation in physical activity also increases kids' self-esteem and decreases their anxiety and stress level. Isn't test-taking sometimes stressful? Hmmm, there's a principal I know who needs a little schooling.

So how can you be an advocate for kids' health and fitness in your child's elementary school? Here are a few ideas:

Write up a short recap of the latest research on physical activity and academic performance. Put it in easy-to-read bullet point form and send it to your child's principal. Yes, be one of those parents. 
If your child's principal is open to the idea of adding more P.E. programming, but funding is an issue, put on your volunteer hat. Even if you don't have expertise in fitness, you can still be a motivator by starting a kids' walking program on campus. Also, a large boom box blasting kids' favorite songs during lunch recess will get a lot of kids moving effortlessly. 
Ask a fitness-minded teacher to co-lead the American Heart Association's Jump Rope for Heart challenge. The AHA will send you all the required materials. 
With your principal's permission, invite a fitness professional from your local gym to lead workouts at the school. Make sure the instructor has experience teaching fitness to kids. If funding is an issue, the gym may agree to send an instructor in exchange for mention in the school newsletter. 
Be the kids' fitness crusader in your child's school. P.E. is more important now than ever. E-mail me about your success and I'll share it with the Health News readers
