Perhaps we’ve been inspired by television shows like Dancing with the Stars and So You Think You Can Dance? Or could it be we’ve been aspiring dancers all along? Either way, dancing hasn’t been this popular since the days of disco. The American Council on Exercise has deemed dance-based classes as one of the hottest trends in fitness programming for 2009. So it’s no surprise Zumba classes are popping up around the nation, inspiring people to shimmy and shake their way to a healthier mind and body.

Created by Miami-based choreographer Alberto “Beto” Perez, Zumba began as an exciting fusion of aerobics and Latin salsa dancing. Over time, the program has expanded to incorporate a variety of dance styles in its routines, including cumbia, merengue, reggaeton, mambo, rumba, flamenco, African, and Middle Eastern dance techniques. Classes are designed so that the students can easily master the choreography. The philosophy is that students will get the best workout by being swept away by the exotic rhythms and the thrill of moving like a dancer. The slogan for Zumba says it all—Ditch the workout and join the party! 

The hour-long Zumba classes follow the principles of interval training to maximize caloric output. In practice, this means that your heart rate accelerates during a fast-paced salsa routine, then recovers during a slower, more stylized flamenco number, then increases again during a gyrating African dance, and so on. Toning exercises are also included in a typical Zumba class, although with a dance-inspired twist. Sqauts and lunges might be accompanied by shoulder shimmies or flamenco-style arm movements.

When asked what the main appeal of a Zumba class is, Susie Bartes, a certified Zumba instructor in Los Angeles has no hesitation: “It’s the music.” She often gets inquiries from students about the music she uses in class. Like many Zumba instructors, Bartes prefers to use music in its original, authentic form, rather than an Americanized version mixed by a deejay. “The music transports you to another part of the world and inspires you to shake stuff you’re not used to shaking.” The music makes Bartes’ job easier since it’s her goal to treat her students to such a good time that they don’t even feel like they’re working out. A qualified Zumba instructor, like Bartes, will have a solid command of musical arrangement and know how to choreograph according to the phrasing of a song. But how do you know if your Zumba instructor has truly been “Zumbafied?”  

Zumba is a trademarked program, but that doesn’t necessarily prevent unqualified, untrained, and inexperienced people from leading a class that’s promoted as Zumba. The fitness industry is notorious for being a breeding ground for self-proclaimed “experts.” Zumba does require that people participate in a certification workshop to use the Zumba name, and to keep their instructor status current by taking follow-up courses presented by the Zumba Academy. But like a lot of trademarked programs in the fitness industry, there is no quality control or monitoring after the certification process. So the irony is, an uncertified but naturally gifted dancer and teacher may be a better Zumba instructor than someone who went the legal route through the certification process. In the end, the marketplace will weed out the unqualified instructors. Fitness enthusiasts are savvy consumers, and a good instructor will keep them coming back for more.

After being an instructor in the fitness industry for many years, I love being a student in a class where I can learn something new. Zumba gives me the opportunity to finally know the difference between a merengue and a mambo. But my favorite thing about my weekly Zumba class is sharing the dance floor with the women over sixty who shimmy and circle their hips with abandon. What an inspiration!
