I’m honored and thrilled to be contributing to Health News. For the past 12 years I’ve been trekking across the country inspiring kids to get up and move. Sitting down in one place to write is my challenge! Through ElectriKids, I lead high-energy, educational, and interactive fitness assemblies in elementary schools. Imagine hundreds of kids, arms in the air, moving along to their favorite song, and you get the picture. During the workout we find our heart rate, do the “Muscle Mania Rap,” and get plenty sweaty. It’s not your typical school assembly. The teachers and principals often dress in workout wear and join in the fun. It’s my dream job. 

In addition to energizing other people’s kids, I’m also a mom. I have a 2-year-old son who has more energy than even I do. Like a lot of busy moms, I struggle with balance, time management, and a bit of guilt. (More on that in future columns.) I also have a wonderful husband whose idea of exercise is taking out the trash. Opposites attract, I guess. I teach daily kids’ fitness classes, lead fitness assemblies, and maintain a web site. My poor dog usually gets his walk around 11pm. 

In my column I hope to share my expertise and passion for kids’ fitness with parents, educators, and anyone who cares about kids’ wellness. It’s an important topic that is finally getting recognized in the media- albeit a little late. We all know by now that Americans of all ages aren’t getting enough exercise. We’ve seen the public service ads and news magazine articles featuring discouraged, obese children. Except for extreme cases of childhood obesity, most kids just need guidance in finding a fun outlet for their energy. They need to see that exercise is more than jumping jacks and push-ups. 

In my work with kids, I focus on the benefits of exercise as they relate to a child’s total well being. The word “fat” never makes its way into my presentations. Group exercise plays an important role in a child’s physical, emotional, and social health. If kids get leaner in the process, that’s an added benefit. When an entire gymnasium of second graders are jumping and singing the lyrics to “Who Let the Dogs Out,” I can guarantee they’re not thinking about how much fat they’re burning. They’re experiencing the joy, freedom, release, and camaraderie of sweating along with their friends. That’s when I know I’m doing my job. 

My approach to this column will take the same perspective. I’ll focus on fitness as it relates to the family’s total well being. In future columns of the Fit Family section you’ll find: 

tips on how to motivate your kids to move 
ideas for family workouts 
ways to explain basic physiology to kids 
stories from my work with kids from California to South Carolina 
creative Jr. workouts- tested on real kids! 
reasons to take time for yourself, and ways to do it 
time management strategies for today’s busy moms 
I hope my column motivates you to make fitness a part of your family’s daily life. I also envision this column being an open forum for ideas from all of us who are in the trenches raising healthy kids. I want to learn about your challenges and triumphs. With your permission, I’ll share some of your stories. I look forward to hearing from many of you soon. 
