One of the things I’ve learned during my time leading fitness assemblies in schools is that no matter where you are—inner city or rural hamlet—one thing remains the same:  Encouraging hundreds of pre-teens to move to music can be a daunting task.  The social awkwardness and peer pressure is palatable as soon as they enter the auditorium. Most of them join in during the warm-up, but there are always a few hold-outs. You can’t miss them, their arms folded or hands shoved safely in their pockets. But I never worry because I have a sure-fire tool in my arsenal that’s virtually guaranteed to get them moving: boxing aerobics. It’s my old stand-by. I also depend on it for Family Workouts. Dads who often watch from the sidelines get up and join in during the boxing aerobics segment, and before you know it, I have them dancing the Cha Cha Slide. 

The well-suited marriage of tough boxing moves and rhythmic aerobic dance moves creates a workout that the whole family, even your hard-to-please teens, can enjoy at home. There are various boxing and kickboxing aerobics DVDs on the market that you can try at home. But to get you started, I’ve outlined below the basics of boxing aerobics.  A search on the web will offer you some visuals to accompany this guideline. But keep in mind, all you boxing purists, that the moves described below are for boxing aerobics, where the goal is to get a good workout, not defeat your opponent. Some of the punches and stances have been adapted to flow better with music.

Before beginning, encourage your kids to tap into their tough side. Ask them to visualize a time when they’ve felt strong and fierce. Tell them to remember that feeling through out the boxing workout. Vocalizing their strength by grunting “huh!” during the workout should also be encouraged. To avoid any shiners, make sure there is adequate space between the boxers.  

Equipment needed:  one rope, about 8 feet long, and a soft target or throw pillow.

Suggested Music: “Let’s Get Ready to Rumble” spoken by Michael Buffer and “Get Ready 4 This” by 2 Unlimited.  Continue with high-energy music with a similar tempo.

Warm-up  (5 minutes) Stick to the theme and avoid moves that are too dance oriented.  Try jogging in place, lunges, and shoulder rotations to warm-up the upper body.

Cardio (20 minutes) Rotate through the following exercises in random order.  Change moves with the phrasing of the music.

Light on your feet: While guarding your face with your fists, rock side to side to the music.  Feet are shoulder width apart and knees are slightly bent. Use this move as a “filler” between other moves.
Jab: This forward punch is quick and explosive.  Feel your shoulder being thrust into the punch.  Your arm doesn’t extend fully.  Instead, use your muscles to stop it and bring it back in.
Uppercut: Engage your powerful quadriceps muscles (thighs) to get the momentum for this punch.  Swing your punch in an upward motion, stopping at about chin level.
Cross punch: Extend this forward punch diagonally across your body at chest level.  Make sure to swivel your back foot with each punch.
Hook: Create a hook by bending your elbow at a 90 degree angle.  Swing your hook horizontally at your invisible opponent’s chin area.
Combination: Group a few of the punches into a pattern that follows the music’s phrasing.  Example:  jab, jab, hook, uppercut, repeat
Jump rope: Mimic skipping rope by jumping to the rhythm with legs together and arms rotating at the elbow.
Speed bag: Use rapid fire, rotating punches to hit an imaginary speed bag at eye level.
Bob and weave: Two people are needed to hold a rope taut at chest level.  While guarding your face with your fists, face one of the rope holders and stay “light on your feet.”  Duck under the rope and pop up on each side of the rope without hitting it with your head.  Take turns.
Target: Use a soft target made for boxing or martial arts.  A throw pillow will even do.  Take turns performing quick jabs on the target.  Switch the target to a horizontal position to absorb uppercut blows.

Cool-Down  (5 minutes) Do standing stretches for all the major muscle groups.  Don’t forget to stretch the hard-working muscles in your back (trapezius, rhomboids, and latissimus dorsi).

