By spending so much time on elementary and middle school campuses, I’m privy to the world of school lunches. Yes, tater tots are still being served. Ketchup is still deemed a vegetable at some schools. Salad bars are making their way into the cafeteria, but most feature wilted iceberg lettuce and fatty ranch dressing. No offense to the hard-working lunch ladies out there. After all, they’re just following the orders of school administrators and hustling to feed hundreds of kids everyday. Yet, many schools have adopted small changes to their school lunch program, like replacing the traditional milk cartons with low-fat, hormone-free, organic milk. Change is good—but there needs to be a revolution.

The Sack Lunch Solution
I truly have been impressed with a lot of the homemade lunches I see on campus. More than the pre-packaged Lunchables, I see kids munching on vegetarian sushi rolls, or crisp, colorful strips of bell peppers, or turkey on wheat. Packing your child’s lunch is the best way to ensure they’re getting a nutritious meal. It’s not foolproof, of course. Trades are still commonplace. That tangerine you packed may be traded for a bag of chips. Uneaten apples often end up in the trash too. But by instilling healthy eating habits at home, and having your kids help decide what goes in their lunch, you’ll be taking the steps needed to ensure your kid is eating a healthy lunch at school. For some sack lunch variety, check out this Healthy Eating column. 

The Tech Solution
In reality, many busy parents don’t have the time or the money to pack a nutritious lunch. For generations, school cafeterias have been the bridge between school and home. Some children even eat breakfast at school. At the middle school level, school menus are often a la carte, which means kids can pick and choose which items to put on their tray. Lunch can consist of chips and cookies, with a chocolate milk chaser. There are now ways, however, to monitor what your child buys for lunch. Internet programs like mynutrikids.com and mealpayplus.com offer computerized payment systems that report your child’s meal selections. Be sure to check with your child’s school to learn if a program like this is available.

The Volunteer Solution
Even schools with the best intentions end up serving food that is processed, genetically modified, and full of high-starch ingredients. It takes a lot of funding to serve nutritious, organic food. Here’s where parents can make a difference. Volunteer to:

Start and maintain a vegetable garden on campus.  Enlist the help of students to harvest and prepare the vegetables for cafeteria lunches.
Lead nutrition workshops on campus. Inspire the kids to demand better choices at lunch.
Raise funds to have weekly organic lunch days. In many areas, there are organic food companies that deliver lunches made specifically for schools.
Lobby your school district to get involved with the Farm-to-School program. (www.farmtoschool.org)

The Revolution
In my research on school nutrition, one program stands out as truly revolutionary. It’s called The Edible Schoolyard. Pioneered by a chef in northern California, the non-profit has turned an unused school parking lot into a flourishing organic garden that grows fruit, vegetables, and grains. Students and volunteers plant seeds, harvest crops, prepare meals, and generate compost- all on campus. Much of the magic happens in the school’s “kitchen classroom.” It’s there where the young chefs get creative with the ingredients they grew themselves. Meals are shared with teachers at tables decorated with flowers picked from, you guessed it, the school’s garden. This program may sound unattainable, radical, even. But by integrating just a portion of a program like this into a school campus, students will develop respect and better appreciation for what they eat.

