“Thirty Days to Thin Thighs!” “Beat the Belly Fat Blues!” Glance at the cover of any mass-market fitness magazine and you’re likely to surmise that being fit means being thin. But what is the true meaning of fitness? Reputable fitness professionals will present a deeper, more comprehensive definition. It’s the ability of the heart, lungs, and muscles to function at a high level of efficiency, leading to a better quality of life. 

Ah, quality of life. We all want it, but we’re not quite sure how to get it. A shorter commute time to work, living with less financial debt, and maintaining solid social relationships are all factors that can contribute to a higher quality of life. But when it comes to your daily life, being physically fit trumps them all. Just think about all the simple tasks you do each day. Being fit enables you to perform these chores efficiently without injury. Don’t take for granted the confidence you gain by accomplishing life’s little necessities. Now consider life’s exciting adventures—that ski vacation or ballroom dancing class, for example. Being fit enables you participate in enriching and enjoyable activities without fatigue or exhaustion. In a nutshell, being physically fit provides a lifestyle that sedentary people cannot enjoy. 

To send you on the road to a better quality of life, it’s important to understand the four components of fitness. By recognizing these factors, you’ll be better equipped to assess your own level of fitness.

Fit Factor #1 Cardiovascular Endurance
Sometimes referred to as aerobic fitness, cardiovascular endurance is the ability of the heart, blood vessels, and lungs to supply oxygen to working muscles during prolonged physical activity. For some people, this means the ability to walk around an amusement park without getting winded. For others, it could mean the ability to run a marathon. With regular aerobic exercise, your heart will increase its capability to pump more blood and thus deliver more oxygen to your muscles with greater efficiency. This is part of what is called the aerobic "training effect." Over time, the body adapts to the challenges we choose to take on. Someone who has trouble walking around the block can work their way to biking for miles along the beach on gorgeous, sunny day. That’s the beauty of the training effect.

Fit Factor #2 Muscular Strength/Endurance
Muscular strength is essential for normal everyday tasks, such as carrying groceries or standing from a sitting position. We lose muscular strength as we age. So if you want to be the kind of senior citizen that can push your grandkids on the swings, it’s imperative you make strength training part of your workouts now. In addition, strong muscles can prevent injury in weaker areas. For example, strong abdominal muscles protect the weaker, more vulnerable back muscles. Muscular endurance refers to the amount of time you can challenge a muscle group without fatigue. Pushing a stroller up a hill and climbing multiple flights of stairs are examples of activities that test your muscular endurance. 

If the ability to perform everyday tasks isn’t enough to motivate you to be fit, imagine being on a Hawaiian vacation and being too weak to go snorkeling or too winded to hike a volcano. That should do it.

Fit Factor #3 Flexibility
Flexibility is the most often ignored component of fitness. Stiff, inflexible muscles and joints can cause injury and affect your ability to perform simple, everyday tasks. As we age, we gradually lose our flexibility. The good news is we have the power to slow this process down. By engaging in flexibility training, our muscles and connective tissues will adapt by elongating. During the stretching segment of my kids’ classes, I often ask, “How many of you know older people with stiff, sore backs and achy muscles?” I want to get them thinking about the benefits of stretching in the long term. This same lesson could apply to all those adults who rush out of their aerobics class before the cool-down stretch or bodybuilders who are so stiff they can barely bend over to tie their shoes. Don’t underestimate the value of flexibility. You won’t be young forever!

Fit Factor #4 Body Composition
When it comes to the true meaning of fitness, the bathroom scale does lie- well let’s just say it misinforms. A conventional scale cannot assess how much of your body weight is fat, and how much is lean body mass—muscle, blood, bones, and organs. Because muscle weighs more than fat, it is important to measure your body composition rather than your body weight when evaluating your fitness level. Body composition can be measured through the Body Mass Index equation, but other methods of testing performed by fitness or medical professionals are more accurate. Body fat percentage is a better measure of fitness than body weight because it is possible to be thin but still over fat. In fact, people who appear thin on the outside can have a lot of fat stored on the inside, clinging to vital organs like the heart, liver or pancreas.

The same principals of fitness that apply to adults apply to kids. But parents sometimes make the mistake of determining their kids’ level of fitness by assessing performance skills like agility, speed, and hand-eye coordination. In other words, it doesn’t much matter how well kids can dribble a basketball. If they are too winded to make it through a game, the real issue is cardiovascular endurance. In my work with kids, I often observe a lack of aerobic endurance and flexibility, especially among kids over the age of eight. This is the age where many kids begin to be swayed by sedentary endeavors like video games and the computer. Studies show we learn our fitness habits at a young age. Make sure your kids are engaged in activities that challenge their cardiovascular, muscular, and flexibility systems. In doing so, you’ll be helping them on the road to a higher quality of life.

I hope this begins to put into perspective the true meaning of fitness for you. I’m sure it won’t totally prevent you from worrying about flabby thighs or love handles. But I hope it inspires you to think of exercise as a way to better enjoy your life.

