If Alistair Darling, the British Chancellor, wants lessons in self correction, he could do a lot worse than study the details of the emergency budget outlined in Dublin this week by Brian Lenihan, the Irish finance minister. Mr Darling is due to announce his own Budget in a couple of weeks' time, but don't expect him to follow Mr Lenihan's lead. 


Rather than provide the fiscal stimulus demanded of world leaders by Gordon Brown, Ireland has done precisely the reverse and put in train a significant fiscal tightening. Taxes are being raised and public spending is being reined in. Is this not suicide in an economy which is expected to shrink by anything up to 8 per cent this year? 

Not necessarily, but in any case, Mr Lenihan has little choice in the matter. The demands of euro membership force him to take steps to reduce the budget deficit, expected to rise this year to more than four times the European Union maximum, whether he wants to or not. Total public debt as a proportion of national income, having for long ticked along at a lowly 25 per cent, is also spiralling out of control. 

Markets are punishing the government accordingly. Despite Ireland's membership of the euro, spreads on Irish government debt have widened to more than 2.5 per cent to reflect a now plausible risk of default. Mr Lenihan had no option, but he also seems to be doing broadly the right thing. 

If all countries were to follow the same course, then it might indeed result in a second Great Depression. A similar policy response applied internationally in the 1930s ended disastrously for all. But it is perfectly reasonable for smaller countries acting in isolation to think this the right approach. Similar medicine was applied to some of the tiger economies of the Far East after the emerging markets crisis of the late 1990s. Thereby rebooted, many of these economies soon bounced back. 

Ireland is still joined at the hip to the UK economy, so to some extent it can piggy-back off the action being taken in Britain to restimulate the economy. Nor can Britain really complain. The strength of the euro against the pound has put Ireland at a considerable competitive disadvantage to the UK. Irish citizens now regularly troop across the border with Northern Ireland for their weekly shop. 

Catholic guilt is still one of Ireland's defining national characteristics. After the long boom, there is a certain collective, almost masochistic resignation to the present corrective period of pain. The two main planks of Ireland's economic policy – low corporate taxation to encourage inward investment and a high educational budget – are to be maintained, but there's to be a big leap in the middle class tax burden. 

Fears that this might encourage a new wave of Irish emigration, reversing the trend of recent years when there was if anything a move back to Ireland, look overdone. Where will these emigrants go? There are no jobs in Britain, Europe or America, and the few regions of the world which are still growing are not noted for paying Western-style salaries. 

In any case, the short sharp shock approach to getting the public finances back on the straight and narrow may have something to commend it over the long, slow march back to fiscal rectitude that Britain faces once the crisis is over. 

