Stephen Green, the chairman of HSBC, was introduced by Tony Blair a few months back at Davos as one of the few bankers left who still dared show his face during daylight hours. This was not a bad joke from Britain's former Prime Minister made the more pertinent by the fact it is not just that the "caring, sharing" Mr Green, with his strong sense of social responsibility, suddenly finds himself the acceptable face of banking. 

Only a few years ago, Mr Green was accused by the City of being asleep at the wheel. His lack of go-getting zeal now seems to have served as a positive boon. HSBC has managed to survive the credit crunch in rather better shape than most, with the share price having "only" halved since its peak of two and a half years ago. By the standards of the banking sector, that counts as an almost stellar performance.

HSBC's great strength as a bank is that it has long been a player of global proportions and therefore felt no need to go for broke during the boom to acquire this status. Royal Bank of Scotland and Halifax Bank of Scotland, by contrast, were back then still pretenders; their recklessly expansionist ambitions ended up sinking them. 

Like some supertanker, HSBC just trundles on. The latest example of HSBC resilience is the success of its £12.5bn rights issue, which achieved a near 97 per cent take-up. Sale of the rump was subscribed five times. OK, so the issue was so deeply discounted that it would have been hard for it to fail, but that didn't stop a similarly discounted HBOS rights issue being left with the underwriters. HSBC just seems to be in a different class. No need for Government bailouts there.

Or not yet, anyway. HSBC's 2003 acquisition of the American sub-prime lender, Household International, remains an open wound which is refusing to heal. Despite massive write-offs, there is still a $34bn gap between the carrying cost of Household's assets in HSBC's books and what they would fetch if all sold off at market prices tomorrow – their "fair value". It could reasonably be argued, therefore, that HSBC still hasn't raised enough in terms of new capital to see it through the banking crisis. It might need more.

Well, that might be a possibility, but it's not the way the HSBC board looks at the problem, and with good reason. Nobody's buying sub-prime mortgage debt out there right now. The market is virtually non-existent, so the price of that debt is artificially depressed to levels which are well below the already impaired likely maturity value. 

What's more, few if any organisations have as big and strong a balance sheet as HSBC, which means HSBC will find it a good deal cheaper than anyone else to finance these loans in run-off. Anyone who buys at these prices would expect to make a good rate of return. Since HSBC can fund and manage this workout value better than anyone else, it would be silly to sell. The final loss is therefore likely to be considerably less than $34bn.

Even more ridiculous is the idea floated by Knight Vinke, the activist investor which holds a small share stake in HSBC, that the bank should simply put Household into liquidation and walk away from the liabilities in their entirety. Would that it were so simple. Even comparatively small and financially weak companies that try to cast the liabilities of troubled subsidiaries adrift in this way tend to get sued to destruction by aggrieved creditors. Companies only do it when they are financially desperate and therefore feel they've got nothing to lose.

Companies with discretion in the matter are making a statement of preference for one set of stakeholders over another by going this route. The notional benefit to HSBC shareholders from putting Household into liquidation is cancelled out by the loss to bondholders in Household, some of whom may be one and the same.

The idea that HSBC, a hugely leveraged business, could walk away from its debt obligations at Household and expect all other lenders to the bank to carry on as if nothing had happened is naive. The reputational damage would be immense, and the board would spend the rest of its natural life in litigation. Nor would it be remotely possible to enter into a negotiation with bondholders about a "shared" solution to the problem. Since bondholders know that in practice it is virtually impossible for HSBC to walk away, they'll take the view that there is nothing to talk about.

Mr Green's sense of social responsibility doesn't have to be brought into play to know that reneging on obligations is not an option for HSBC. It would end up destroying a great deal more shareholder value than it protects.

