Was this George Osborne's "neoclassical endogenous growth theory" moment? In a long speech yesterday to the Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, the shadow Chancellor wheeled off a bewildering array of economic thinking and analysis to justify emerging Conservative Party thinking on the financial crisis and how to deal with its aftermath. 


Even to me, much of it was economic gobbledygook, though perhaps nothing quite as pretentious as the lines written by Ed Balls for the then shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown. Yet hidden within the eco-babble were some excellent points well made. We'll forget the soliciting of party funds in Corfu, Mr Osborne seems to be rediscovering some of his old self-confidence. 

Particularly striking is the idea that Britain should have more but smaller banks. The implications of this suggestion for Lloyds Banking Group, which has surrendered its independence to the Government in pursuit of a monopolistic merger with Halifax Bank of Scotland (HBOS), is potentially catastrophic. As Mr Osborne points out, the Government now has a powerful influence over the future structure of the UK banking industry. 

The present Government has sanctioned the creation of this monopoly as a quid pro quo for the service performed by Lloyds in rescuing HBOS from oblivion. But once in power, the Tories may well dismantle it. The same fate may await Royal Bank of Scotland on re-privatisation. 

Do we really need banks which are not only too big to fail, but potentially too big to bail, asks Mr Osborne. What's chiefly needed is vibrant competition in banking, together with banks which are too small to pose any systemic threat if they fail. The American model of community banking remains an excellent one for the bog standard business of serving local communities with their utility needs. Too often, the supposed benefits of economy of scale have been used as an excuse for monopolistic and high-risk lending abuse. 

There is nothing evil or wrong about banking, which performs a vital social and economic service. What's gone wrong with it is that it has come to serve the fee-driven interests of individual bankers rather than those of its customers. 

Mr Osborne is certainly on to something here. 

