It would have been hard enough for Alistair Darling, the Chancellor, to get away with announcing a new fiscal stimulus in the Budget this month after the shot across the bows delivered a couple of weeks back by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King.

Now along comes the Institute for Fiscal Studies with a devastating analysis of the state of the Government's books which seems to make it harder still. According to the IFS's Robert Chote, the effects of the recession on the public finances are likely to be so acute that the Government will need to tighten fiscally by a further £39bn on top of the £38bn already announced in last November's pre-Budget report to stand any chance of returning the books to where they were supposed to be by 2015/16.

That target date always did seem so far in the future as to be virtually meaningless. The IFS analysis shows it to be cloud cuckoo land. Just to put the £39bn in context, this is the equivalent of virtually all of last year's schools and children's budget, or, if it were to be addressed the other way by raising taxes, the average would be £1,250 a year for every family in the country. Not pretty.

Quite how the Government is going to wriggle, spin and mislead its way through these numbers is anyone's guess. The recession is already self-evidently much more severe than forecast in the pre-Budget report, while even the Chancellor now openly admits things are a great deal worse than he thought they would be.

Unless the Chancellor plans to announce that he'll tax until the pips squeak or impose further deep cuts on public spending – not very likely with an election looming – he's going to have to abandon all pretence at ever again meeting the famous prudential rules designed by his predecessor, Gordon Brown.

The Chancellor is caught in a trap. If he raises taxes or cuts spending into a fast contracting economy, he'll sink the public finances even further into the mire, for to inflict more damage on demand by squeezing fiscally during a recession will only undermine the tax base even more.

The PBR forecast public sector net debt would peak at 57.4 per cent as a proportion of national income in 2013-14 and then begin falling thereafter. The IFS says in the absence of action, actually what it will do is rise towards 80 per cent and then continue growing, albeit at a more gradual pace thereafter. In normal circumstances, such an outcome would be thought utterly disastrous. The one thing the Chancellor has got going for him is that in a world where all governments are having to borrow like crazy to stay afloat, such elevated levels of debt may not seem so bad.

In fact, total British public debt as a proportion of national income will only be moving towards levels which have long reigned in a number of European countries. What's more, Japan has for years successfully managed to finance public debt at much higher levels than ever likely to occur in Britain. Rather more worrying, if you add together the totality of private and public debt, then Britain will soon be soaring to the top of the leader board. There may be limits to what Britain as a whole is allowed to borrow.

When public debt is rising as steeply as this, another 2 per cent of fiscal stimulus scarcely seems to matter and might credibly be sold as likely to do the public finances more good than harm if it causes economic activity to be higher than otherwise.

But for the Governor of the Bank of England's warnings, the Government might just about have got away with another stimulus provided it was also able to present a plan for restoring the public finances to health at a later stage. The Governor's comments have made such an approach more risky, politically and financially. Whatever the Chancellor does, he would expect condemnation from the Opposition. But he now faces the possible condemnation of markets too, which is far more dangerous.

The golden rule was designed to give credibility to Labour's management of the public finances. Now it's gone, and nobody can agree what should replace it, or indeed what should be done to dig the economy and the public finances out of their hole. Either way, it's going to be an interesting Budget.

