I see that The Sun newspaper has started "campaigning" for the Government to introduce a car "scrappage scheme" in this month's Budget similar to the one running in Germany. This is a bit like asking for the sun to come up every morning, as the Government is now so widely expected to introduce such a scheme that if it doesn't everyone will want to know why. 


Yet is paying people £2,000 a pop to scrap the old banger and buy a new one really such a great use of taxpayers' money? The scheme has been extraordinarily successful in Germany in helping the struggling car industry stay afloat, so much so that according to reports the German government is about to more than triple the scheme's budget to €5bn. 

Car sales in Germany last month rose a staggering 20 per cent to their highest level in 10 years. Germans are not noted for their big spending habits so, in no small measure, this recession-defying car-buying spree must be down to the scrappage scheme. That doesn't necessarily mean that we ought to be repeating it here. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that industry specific subsidy of this sort merely distorts consumer spending patterns, rather than adding to overall demand. More money is spent on cars, but perhaps less on other things. 

Auto manufacturing is much more important to the German economy than it is in Britain, where around 85 per cent of car purchases are imports, many of them from Germany. 

What's more, the £2,000 proposed only really acts as an incentive for relatively low budget, smaller vehicles. There are only really two of these now manufactured in Britain – the Nissan micra and the BMW mini, together accounting for no more than 4 per cent of the British car market. For big-ticket cars, such as Jaguars and Landrovers, a scrappage scheme is not to be sneezed at, but it is unlikely to make a significant difference to demand. If you have a car of more than nine years old, the qualifying age for the German scheme, you are unlikely to be trading up to a new Landrover or Bentley. 

The scheme could, I guess, be made exclusive to British manufacturers, but the European Commission might have something to say about it if it is. 

This doesn't necessarily mean we shouldn't be doing it. Most of Europe has got the car scrapping habit, and in the new caring sharing spirit of co-operation between nations in trying to get the global economy going again, such a scheme may have a certain magnanimous virtue. Britain still makes lots of auto components and several important engine plants, all of which are benefiting from the scrappage schemes already operating elsewhere. 

Don't believe any of the Government guff you are likely to hear about how paying people to have their cars crushed will help with the "greening" of Britain. Contrary to popular belief, continuing to run an old banger may be more environmentally friendly than buying a brand new shiny Prius. 

This is because a substantial proportion of the emissions a car will produce over its lifetime is expended in its manufacture, which is an incredibly energy-intensive process involving myriad different components shipped in from all over the world. With an old car, this is already sunk pollution. With a new one, it is pollution yet to be created. 

Hanging on to the old banger may not be good for the economy, but it's probably better for the planet. 

