Have you ever heard anything quite so preposterous as the chairman of the Dunfermline Building Society's fulminations against the Treasury for failing to bail him out with wads of taxpayers' money? Perhaps he thought that with the billions that have been sunk into Royal Bank of Scotland and Halifax Bank of Scotland, all financial institutions north of the border have a God-given right to funds from Westminster. Or maybe it was just that with fellow Scots ruling the roost at both No 10 and No 11, he expected special treatment.

Unfortunately for him, Scottish comradery may if anything have worked against him. Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling are sensitive to the charge of favouritism and determined to avoid it. Yet even disregarding the politics of it all, it would not have been right to have saved Dunfermline for the nation. On all matrices, Dunfermline was essentially bust. It only has itself to blame for its own misfortune.

Jim Faulds, the Dunfermline chairman who has been so vocal in criticising the "faceless mandarins of Whitehall", cannot be held wholly responsible, for he didn't become chairman until April 2007. But he didn't put a stop to the reckless mortgage and commercial lending then underway, some of which took place after he became chairman. This is what he had to say about the society in the last members' statement. I quote it at length simply because of its priceless, and now totally discredited, smugness. 

"I can categorically state, as Chairman, your money is safe with Dunfermline Building Society. There are a number of critical ways in which our situation differs from that of Northern Rock, which is a bank and not a building society. Building Societies are subject to more stringent regulatory controls over funding than banks and Dunfermline Building Society adheres strictly to these requirements. In particular the Society has a very high level of funding from individual savers and has much less reliance on wholesale money markets. When the wholesale money markets dried up, Northern Rock struggled to secure funding. The reason funding from wholesale money markets dried up was linked to US sub-prime mortgage lending. Our Society has no exposure to sub-prime lending. We have a high-quality loan book, with arrears levels well below average." Ah, the virtues of the good old, trustworthy mutual. Unfortunately, they proved no protection against hubristic expansionism.

Just as priceless is the interview run a few years ago in The Scotsman with one Peter Weanie, the executive hired by Dunfermline back in 2002 to spearhead the society's expansion into commercial and social lending. "So, given that Dunfermline is dwarfed by its Scottish rivals – Royal Bank of Scotland and Bank of Scotland – what accounts for the team's success? Weanie puts it down to... speed in responding to loan applications and close relationships with customers. 'Bigger banks are so large that they can operate at quite a distance from the customer. Our customers, which include big, well-known names, like the fact they are really important to us.'"

Dunfermline is the Bank of England's first use of the new Special Resolution Regime for dealing with failed banks, so the evolution of official thinking on the matter bears some exploring. The basic residential mortgage book at Dunfermline is sound, but the society got swept up in the lending binge of 2006/7. Commercial lending was expanded threefold within the space of a few years, and the society also bought a number of high-risk, self-certified and buy-to-let mortgage portfolios from GMAC and Lehman Brothers.

Time was that when a building society got itself into trouble, another building society would merely be leant upon to take it over. On this occasion nobody individually wanted to play ball. The potential losses on Dunfermline's "unconventional lending" were too big for anyone to assume individually. 

The idea of a lifeboat of several societies, together with the injection of some government money, was explored, but a number of players expressed scepticism. The minimum new capital requirement stipulated by the Financial Services Authority was £60m. Even if the Government had been prepared to put up such a sum, it is not clear it would have been enough, and in any case the society doesn't earn sufficient in the way of profits to service new equity of this size.

The Government's calculation is that use of the Special Resolution Regime will end up costing it a lot less, while providing a great deal more long-term certainty for depositors. The maths works like this. Nationwide takes on the liabilities (the deposits and wholesale funding) and the assets of the residential mortgage book. The shortfall is covered by a £1.6bn cash payment by the Treasury. Most of this ought to be recouped by selling off the residual commercial lending and social housing portfolio. 

To the extent that it isn't, the industry-funded Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) will pick up the tab up to a maximum exposure of £50,000 per depositor. Assuming the eventual losses on commercial lending are no more than the FSA's estimate of £100m to £150m, that would leave the taxpayer with only a small, residual liability of no more than £15m.

Why didn't the Government fall back entirely on the FSCS to pick up the tab? After all, that's what it is there for. The answer is that the financial system is judged still to be too fragile to allow for any losses by depositors whatsoever. The FSCS picks up only the first £50,000 of each depositors' loss. Both the Prime Minister and the Chancellor have said that no depositor will lose a penny as a result of the banking crisis. They must honour their pledge.

As for Mr Faulds, remember what he said as his society was merrily buying up the sub-prime lending portfolios of Lehman Brothers and GMAC. "Our society has no exposure to sub-prime lending." It's hard to have any sympathy for his present bleatings.

