Having announced a $5bn equity issue, it took Goldman Sachs less than 24 hours to place the stock and bank the money. Compare that even to the truncated timetable recently agreed by UK institutional investors for the City's preferred method of raising new equity – the rights issue – and the British system is still found wanting. HSBC had to wait five weeks for the money during its recent record-breaking rights issue, which in these markets remains a nail-bitingly long time for underwriters to be left on the hook.

Even so, the traditional rights issue would seem to have plenty to commend it over the alternatives. In markets where investors demand deep discounts for participation, it is still the only fair method of raising new equity capital. Research by Goldman Sachs suggests that anything up to €300bn (£267bn) of new equity will be raised in Europe this year, with perhaps the same again the year after, and that's ignoring financials.

After the "de-equitisation" of recent years (leveraged buyouts and share buybacks), a massive programme of "re-equitisation" is under way. On the whole, investors seem prepared to back this process, though obviously there are some companies where they won't, Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS being the two most obvious. Out of the public eye, there is a whole host of others which have met a similar refusal when sounding out investors. Many of these companies will either fail or be taken over.

But for the bulk, shareholders will cough up the money without too much complaint. It would surely be in everyone's interests if, this time around, investors found some way of breaking the cycle whereby new equity is raised in the bust and then paid out in dividends and share buybacks during the boom, only for the process to begin all over again in the next bust. 

UK equities have generated virtually no return outside dividends over the past 12 years, and even the dividends seem largely to have been recycled out of shareholders' own money. Much has been written about the corporate governance failings of the banks, but it seems to have been equally bad almost everywhere else.

