WELL I can't say I'm sorry to see the back of 2008 – it's had its high points, of course, but for many, many people I know it has been a year of injustice – with no quick solution in sight.

The economic day of reckoning has finally arrived for Gordon Brown and all those who believed in his unremitting guff about having abolished the economic cycles – ending what he called "Tory Boom and Bust". Well we're now about to experience Labour Boom and Bust as his government is midwife to the Mother of all recessions. 

It's an injustice that we have no way of holding him to account and shall probably have to wait until 2010 before we can cast our own verdict. It is always possible that, seeing just how bad the economy is going to turn, Brown will call an early election. Probable but unlikely, for as Gordon Brown believes he can fix almost anything, parting the waters on his road to Damascus, I expect him to calculate he can make the economy better by the summer of 2010 and he should be rewarded by a grateful, if amnesic, electorate.

Indeed, Chancellor Darling is predicting the UK recovery to have happened by the end of 2009 – ahead of predictions for the American and European economies – so why should Labour cut and run? 

As people see their pension pots melt before their very eyes (HBOS shares lost ninety per cent of their value this year) and many of those still working are told they will have to look elsewhere for employment the electorate's sense of injustice will grow. 

But the greatest injustice is all those people – probably the majority of us – who have acted prudently over the last ten years but are now paying the price for all those hedonistic gamblers that bought houses they couldn't afford on mortgages that were beyond their means with repayments they now cannot honour. These spendthrifts are being offered all sorts of help – six months' forgiveness on missed payments, the offer of government financial assistance and hand outs – while those who looked after their money and lived within their means are the ones who are expected to pay the price. Try surviving on fast-deflating savings as interest rates crash and the income dries up – or apply for a mortgage to move home only to yourself trapped as loans are rationed. 

The Government blames the banks, saying it has pumped in much-needed capital so they can now release credit – but the capital it has ploughed in comes at a price of ten points over the Bank of England base rate, when the banks lend it out to customers at four points over base rate! As long as the banks have to take that loss of six points the loans will be unforthcoming.

If asked to choose between the economy recovering in 2009 and Hibs winning the cup – I'd put my money on the latter. Even though it's been 106 years since Hibs last managed that feat I give Mixu and his men more chance than Brown and his buddies. A Happy New Year to all Evening News readers.

Too high a price
There are other injustices at home and abroad, not least the injustice of our servicemen and women continuing to be overstretched and underpaid whilst using equipment that is just not fit for purpose. Expect them to be asked to do even more next year – and suffer unnecessary casualties – while other European countries make little if any effort to share the effort. 

Afghanistan will be the prime candidate for an increase in hostility as President-elect Obama has already made it clear that he wants to send 30,000 more troops there and Gordon Brown has announced an increase in British troop levels by a few thousand more. 

Strategists are, however, increasingly saying even these numbers will not be enough, and with the German troops stationed there mainly confined to barracks 2009 looks set to be marked by a major disagreement between Brown and Obama if we refuse to send any more squaddies into battle. 

Until the other "good" Europeans put themselves in the line of fire I don't see why Britain should make any more sacrifices.

Tied up in knots
Another ram-raid on Multrees Walk has seen yet more expensive handbags stolen. Some £100,000 of classy gear has been knicked in the last three months as hoods back-up their shock and awe 4x4s into the shop facades and then drive off much the wealthier by value if not in taste. 

Better security is obviously needed, but how did they get near this pedestrianised street anyway? I gave up driving into the city centre long ago and even the occasional taxi I use has extreme difficulty avoiding the obstacle course that is Edinburgh's tram works. 

In fact, if the Multrees managers were simply to put tram constructors TIE in charge I'm sure the raids would become nigh impossible. They've certainly made life difficult for every other entrepreneur in the city in 2008.
