HELP m'Boab! I never thought writing a political column could be so risky. Party leaders are falling like flies at the moment. Last week it was Wendy and this week it has been Nicol Stephen's turn. It's with trepidation I hit my keyboard not knowing if no sooner has Friday's paper hit the streets when Robin Harper or Annabel Goldie might commit political hara-kiri and make my gnarled thoughts instantly out of date.

One thing is certain, Alex Salmond's not going anywhere in a hurry, he can sit back and enjoy the spectacle as his opponents go through yet another exercise of trying to find the right man or woman who offers that elusive thing – leadership.

ThereADVERTISEMENTare many good people in the Scottish Parliament, honest! Some have particular gifts – speaking that can convince and inspire, or thinking out loud to offer us a creative solution, while some simply engage with electors, connecting at a human level so people feel the sincerity and offer their support. Few, however, have all of these things together and that's why some parties are struggling to show leadership.

Wendy was bright and could make good arguments – but did she connect? Did she engage? Was she what Labour voters wanted? I don't think so – and frankly I believe she would have struggled to win people over. A good person on policy, maybe, but a people's politician? No, never.

Having Wendy as leader would have been like the Tories choosing Sir Keith Joseph in preference to Margaret Thatcher. You need a certain instinct and gut feeling that helps you know how the public thinks and what the public wants. Joseph never had that judgement and it was only when it deserted Thatcher that, after 15 years as leader, she went into retirement.

The Liberal Democrats have a similar problem. Can anyone name a Lib Dem spokesman? I like and rate Tavish Scott (that's the black spot of Monteith on him, now) but he might also wish to put his family arrangements first – he's young and may say the time's not yet right.

The SNP should not get too smug about this disarray – it's only a couple of years ago that it too was languishing in the polls as John Swinney's leadership failed to ignite the Scottish public. A nice man is John, but being nice is not enough. A sort of Tim Henman of Scottish politics.

Salmond's return changed all that – but fate can deal a new hand and the SNP could just as easily find itself looking for a new leader in two months or two years through all sorts of circumstances.

Parties must constantly think of their own regime change and plan for it – but for Labour the most important thing now is for it to have a contest. Do people really know what Labour stands for any more? After ten years of snake-oil sales from Blair and now the equivocating, unsure Gordon Brown, is power the only reason they exist?

In the past eight years Scottish Labour has had nearly as many leaders as Hearts have had managers – and is doing just as badly. It needs to develop a vision and tell people how they will be better off under them. Reconnecting with punters must be the priority – and the way to do that is have a real competition, not a coronation.

Famous Five next
Today the tarpaulin came off the statue of Adam Smith on the Royal Mile which at long last provides a world monument to a man, a Scotsman at that, whose writings did far more to improve the human condition than Marx, Keynes or other favourites of the liberal establishment.

It has been said it's a waste of money, but it was paid for by public subscription, not coerced taxes, so it was for people to choose rather than be patronised with their own money.

It has been said it's in the wrong place, but it is outside the City Chambers – the original site of Edinburgh's exchange where trade and commerce was done – no more fitting site would give it the prominence it deserves.

Soon James Clerk Maxwell will grace George Street – also by sculptor Sandy Stoddart. For me, there can never be enough sculptures or fountains in a city. What about one of the Famous Five at the entrance to Easter Road?

Murray magic ahead
Just like politics, sport takes a certain kind of character to become a winner; you have to be prepared to laugh in the face of adversity and show a dedication and toughness that is difficult to sustain.

Much as I like Tim Henman and admire his achievement in helping keep British tennis alive in some of its darkest days, I am irritated by those that compare Andy Murray to him and suggest the Scot is too uncouth, too humourless, too rough to be a British hero.

But it is the very fact that Murray has aggression and a steely resolve that gives him a better chance of winning Wimbledon than Henman ever had – and being an immortal, not just a hero.

