HOW was it for you? Have you already had the Rennies, the Resolve, the Ibuprofen or a cocktail of pick-me-ups?

Christmas 2008 has come and gone and we are already assaulted by the Boxing Day sales adverts – to be followed in 2009 by the year of closing down sales.

But as we move into a year of dread for most of us what should we take from Christmas, its commercialism and its conspicuous consumption? 

A couple of radio programmes caught my attention this week by looking back at Christmas past and I was struck by how much Christmas traditions had changed over the centuries. Before we top up our Coca-Cola (responsible for popularising the idea of Santa Claus dressed in red), we should consider that the way we celebrated Christmas two hundred years ago was significantly different – and four hundred years ago it was different again – and yet it in essence remains the same, for it continues to retain the same enduring messages that are popular. 

It is blindingly obvious if we take a moment between gorging on the turkey and the Christmas pud and consider just how much of what we now consider the standard formula for Christmas has been invented by cultural commissars such as Charles Dickens and Walt Disney.

The wide variety of food we once ate has been replaced by a rigid conformity of what we are expected to eat now. A look at how our so-called traditional dinner evolved from eating any fowl such as woodcock, swan, goose and, yes, turkey, because they were at their prime before winter hardship set in – to the expectation now that only turkey means Christmas is but one example. Another is how the porridge or pottage of meat and savoury fruits evolved into Christmas pudding. 

The practice of feasting over 12 days from Christmas Eve through to the sixth of January has also been condensed into one orgy of excess and indigestion on Christmas Day alone. Then there is how our families now celebrate the day itself. It used to mean church services, helping the poor, feasting and family games – then came television – so the traditions changed again and became the norm. 

There was a time when Christmas meant the Queen's broadcast, Top of the Pops Special and Morecambe and Wise. Then it became EastEnders/Corrie and Only Fools and Horses. Now it's the Royle Family, Strictly Come Christmas and It'll Be Alright on the Night. Despite the appalling decline in Christmas television entertainment – forcing us to speak to each other and resort to playing games a again – my point is we seem to hardly notice how Christmas evolves.

The reason we cling to old standards at Christmas – such as films like It's a Wonderful Life is because they give us our annual fix of what we really expect from Christmas – people doing good and helping those less fortunate.

Christmas is, of course, full of contradictions; held at the wrong time of the year for Christ's birth to help displace the celebrations of the Pagan Winter solstice, merged with the superstitions of Father Christmas (himself bumped by the Dutch Santa Claus) and facing a sea of commercialism and self-indulgence whilst preaching giving and self-sacrifice. 

Nevertheless, the default nature of mankind is good and celebrating the birth of Jesus – whether you believe he was the son of God, just one of a number of kindly prophets or simply a humble man who preached love – has an enduring appeal that adapts to all that assaults it.

Gordon's shopped
So Gordon Brown believes his VAT cut by a meagre two-and-a-half per cent is working. Excuse me, but this week I shopped in stores offering at least fifty per cent and often seventy per cent from their marked prices – before including the VAT cut. In such a competitive cost-cutting environment the idea that the VAT reduction has made any impact at all is simply risible. Worse still it has meant that almost £20 billion in taxes that the Government badly needs has been given away. How did anyone ever believe the Prime Minister was the best post-war Chancellor Britain had ever had?


Cross to bear
You could be forgiven for thinking that if there was one institution that might seek to protect the meaning of Christmas it would be our Christian Churches, but you would be naively optimistic to do so. 

Not only do some churches change old Christmas carols so that "Glory to the newborn King" becomes the classless 'Glory to the Christ child, bring' or ban the singing of "Oh little town of Bethlehem "because it does not reflect the suffering of its current residents – but words such as "Virgin" are erased for and the gender of Jesus is made ambiguous to avoid accusations of sexism. 

If the Christian church does not root out it's own faithless ones, it will make about as much sense as the compulsory television licence fee in this digital age.

