 LIVE or die by my lists. I don't know if it's some sort of Scottish Presbyterian work ethic thing, or some fixation I have with writing things down (I did use to be a trainspotter, after all) but my lists govern my life.
Most days start with a list of things to do, and end with a list of things still to do that becomes tomorrow's list. At this time of year I am drowning in sheets of lists. I have a Christmas card list, a Christmas presents-to-buy list and a what-I-waADVERTISEMENTnt-for -Christmas list (available free if you are stuck for ideas). 

At least these lists cheer me up – unlike reading the papers these days with so much bad news. Unemployment at a ten-year high and expected to go to three million next year and then there's the complete and utter failure of the attempt by Brown, Darling and associates to make the UK recession-proof.

So why not compile another list, I thought, a list for economic recovery to fight away the recession blues? A Christmas list that might cheer me, and hopefully others, up? 

Top of my list would be to raise the personal tax allowance to £12,000, which would take seven million people out of tax altogether. This would cost £19 billion, peanuts compared to the money thrown at the banks, but it would help the lowest paid the most.

Second would be to take VAT off house repairs, encouraging economic activity in the badly hit building trades and helping to restore property values. It is daft to have 15 per cent VAT on renovations but no VAT on new-build.

Next I would abandon the pointless introduction of a forty-five per cent tax rate for people earning over £150,000 – we should be encouraging people to come to the UK and work harder, not taking away incentives.

Then I would abolish the mad, bad and sad home seller packages that Labour conceived and the SNP now swears by – they will only add costs to the difficult task of selling a house in this recession. We should be helping people, not hindering them.

I would also take at least a pound off spirit duties and reduce beer prices too. This would be self-financing, as we know from past experience that when governments raise such duties the revenues fall, and when they cut them the revenues increase. What better time than Christmas and New Year to drink ourselves out of recession? If it's going to be a hard landing under Boom and Bust Brown then we should at least be able to drown our sorrows.

I would also announce the abolition of inheritance tax with immediate effect. The aim would be to attract back to Britain the large number of self-made millionaires who have left as they saw the Death Tax grow under that grim reaper Gordon Brown. Bringing their personal wealth and conspicuous consumption into this economy would only be good for us. 

As an experiment, I would drop the non-domestic business rates poundage in Scotland to zero pence in the pound, measure the impact it had on the economy and the changes it made to investment and business profits. If it brought a positive outcome I would look to extend it to the rest of the UK. This would especially help retailers, pubs and restaurants in the high streets when their income is suffering.

I would announce the abolition from next year of the BBC's licence fee – our TV tax – removing the BBC's commercial advantage over newspapers and other broadcasters and making most people £140 better off.

Penultimately, I would rein-in Alistair Darling's increased spending and borrowing commitments, partly to make much-needed savings in public spending but also to restore international confidence that Britain is in control of its finances. The falling value of the pound tells you what people think of Britain's ability to handle this recession.

Last in my list of ten things would be the measures to pay for my economic recovery plan. Essentially, this would mean finding about £30bn of savings – but as Alistair Darling already reckons he can do that I've no doubt I could probably save more – the Taxpayers Alliance has identified £100bn of savings, so even half of that would do!

Sadly I don't usually get all the things on my Christmas pressie list, maybe, just maybe, Father Christmas will be good to me this year.

Comic book villain
Last week Gordon Brown was telling us how he saved the world, well it's only taken a week for the Governor of the Bank of England to say he hasn't even saved Great Britain. It turns out that Flash Gordon is human after all. The banking bail-out has been a failure, with banks still not lending and possibly needing more money. The cut in VAT has done nothing to prevent a desperate Christmas for retailers – one shop I went to was sending staff home early it was so quiet. Interest rates are likely to be cut again to try to jump start the patient. If Boom and Bust Brown has to be compared to a cartoon-strip character, Saatchi's would have been better selecting The Joker. 
