HIS name was Andrew J Volstead and he was to become one of the most influential Americans of the 20th century and yet his name is little remembered now, even in that great country. His name was given to the 18th Amendment to the American Constitution, the Volstead Act, passed in January 1919 but known and understood now as the dawn of prohibition.

The theory was simple enough: ban the sale and distribution of alcohol and the nation's crime rate will drop, and the people's health will improve as less alcohol is drunk. People would commit less crime because they would be sober, they would have fewer illnesses because they would be sober and the world would be a better place.

It didn't quite work like that. America's thirst for booze increased rather than diminished, with every back office, cellar and attic that could be converted opening as an illicit speakeasy. By 1925, there were 100,000 speakeasies in New York alone. Crime became rife as previously legal jobs such as a bartender were outlawed and having a celebratory drink was illegal. Murders increased by nearly 80 per cent, the general crime rate nearly doubled and federal convicts increased by a staggering 561 per cent.

Not only did the crime rate worsen, it became organised, with bootleggers developing huge businesses that required teams of people to work outside the law and to defend their market share with death and violence or the threat of either. In one year alone, Chicago suffered more than 400 gangster-related murders. It was an unwelcome development that has stayed with America to this day.

A healthier nation? The number of deaths from alcoholism increased, the arrests for drunkenness grew (by 41 per cent) and the number of drink-driving offences mushroomed (by 81 per cent). To conceal their illicit alcohol, Americans switched from beer to spirits, consuming more potent drinks and becoming drunker by drinking less, often with fatal results. Without legally enforceable standards, deaths from poisoned liquor rose from 1064 in 1920 to 4154 in 1925. Then, finally, 75 years ago on December 5, 1933, the 21st Amendment was ratified and America's failed prohibition experiment ended. Corks popped across the country as the nation raised a glass to prohibition's demise.

Today, in Britain, we have our own prohibitionists. True, they don't (or rather won't) go that far – not yet anyway. For now they want to introduce more and more restrictions on the sale of alcohol and raise ever-higher taxes on its consumption rather than usher in an outright ban – but the lessons they should heed are just the same.

Again, the theory is simple enough. Make booze more expensive and harder to come by and the nation's crime rate will drop and the people's health will improve as less alcohol is drunk. And yet we only have to look across the channel to France and Spain where drink is far cheaper and we will find more sober, law-abiding and healthier societies. A friend of mine just returned from Hong Kong where cans of lager are 20p and he observed no drunkenness or felt threatened by alcohol-fuelled violence.

Andrew Volstead was a political bully who imposed his views on the American public, Labour's Alan Johnson and the SNP's Kenny MacAskill are our political bullies trying to do the same. Today's prohibitionists in the Labour and SNP governments don't have the moral courage of their predecessors to call for a ban, instead they would rather bully us into submission. The result? Pubs will close, people will lose their jobs, there will be more smuggling, more disregard for the law and its agencies – and the health of the nation will worsen.

We need to change our cultural attitudes to drink and drunkenness, not our laws or our taxes. We need our politicians to sober up and kick their dependency on bullying us for our own good. I'd raise my glass to that.

Flash in the pan
"FLASH, you only have fourteen-four hours to save the earth!" goes that memorable line in the excellent, cheesy 70s movie of Flash Gordon. And so Flash saves the world. 

The story goes that, last year, when Labour hired Saatchis, the Tories' old advertising crew, they came up with a poster showing Gordon Brown with the words "Not flash, just Gordon". What a shame it was never used.

Apparently our very own Gordon is not flash, but flush – flush with the conceit that he has saved the world. Go on Gordon, let us have that election now. I really would like to see that poster up in lights. 

Here's another poster for nothing: "Not boom, just bust". With a deep and lengthy recession, we're going to need all the laughs we can get.

Lost for words
SO, it's goodbye to sin, devil, empire, beaver, goldfish, hamster, lobster, magpie, minnow, oyster, weasel, apricot, bacon, beetroot, cauliflower, conker, gooseberry, leek, liquorice and pansy in the Oxford Junior Dictionary. They are out, they are non-words for adults only. They have been replaced with the likes of blog, voicemail, chatroom and Euro.

A world without bacon butties, cauliflower ears and a beetroot faces I just can't imagine. Instead, we get weasel words. It's enough to drive me to drink.
