THERE'S a joke you can often find written on toilet walls – probably written by experienced squaddies – that says military intelligence is a contradiction in terms. Well, I often wonder if the same has to be said for political honesty – and this week's Pre-budget statement by Edinburgh's own Alastair Darling encouraged such thoughts.

This is the man who said Britain was better prepared than the rest of the world for the forthcoming economic crisis – when the reverse was the truth. He's also the man who endorsed some of the worst Treasury predictions as gospel regarding economic gADVERTISEMENTrowth, tax revenues and the public borrowing requirement – all turning out wildly wrong.

There can be no doubting that Britain's economy is now in a perilous state.

It should be remembered that Blair and Brown came to power on the back of what was the best set of economic circumstances that a Labour government has ever inherited. Economic growth had been continuous for every quarter of the previous five years, unemployment was reducing, price inflation was falling, government debt was being cut, the tax burden was becoming lighter and the general standard of living was improving. It was called the "Golden Legacy".

If the Tories had kept their trousers zipped up and rejected the occasional brown envelope for parliamentary questions the electorate would've probably re-elected them. They didn't and they deservedly lost.

New Labour came in and, in an effort to maintain confidence that Blair and Brown were different from Wilson and Callaghan before them, stuck to the prudent Tory spending plans, announcing only a few strategic changes – such as making the Bank of England independent. This should have made the economy more flexible and reliable – but crucially Threadneedle Street was stripped of its role of regulating the high street banks. A price we are all beginning to pay for.

So forget the Golden Legacy, for it has been squandered. Unemployment is set to rise – with CBI predictions putting it at nine per cent, or just under three million by 2010. When we add the explosion under Labour of those receiving sickness benefit it must be fair to say that the levels of those truly unemployed will become far worse than anything Thatcher reputedly achieved (it was in fact the economic price for bad decisions by Heath, Wilson and trades union leaders in the 70s).

The Government expects its own borrowing level to reach record proportions – far worse than achieved by even John Major when the foolish policy to become part of the European currency failed in the early-90s. This borrowing is not only bad for us (for we shall pay higher taxes in the end) but bad for our children and our grandchildren. 

To try and revitalise the economy the Chancellor has offered some rather uninspiring tax cuts, matched with some rather duplicitous tax increases. I can get ten times the discount at Marks & Sparks and Debenhams than Darling's 2.5 per cent reduction in VAT. 

Accompanied by increases in duty the headline VAT cut is all about perception – will it make people spend more money? I doubt it.

And anyway, why is spending more money that has not been earned the solution? Is that not what got us into this mess in the first place, encouraged at every turn by "no more boom and bust" Brown?

The small print reveals that Darling, like Brown, will tax more than he promised – such as on whisky and those on only £20,000, not £150,000, a year.

As if the Chancellor's performance is not lamentable enough, the Governor of the Bank of England now suggests that banks might have to be "nationalised" if they don't return to lending at what he described as previously "normal" levels.

Has he not woken up to the fact that the previous levels of easy lending and easy debt – both government and private – were the cause of our consumer profligacy? How then can more borrowing and more debt be the solution?

Yes, taxes should be cut, but with Britain's borrowing so high it should be funded by cutting public expenditure. The salvation for the economy rests with the private sector creating wealth, creating jobs and paying real earned salaries – yet only the private sector is shedding jobs while the public sector lives in its own privileged, pensioned universe.

Borrowing won't solve a debt problem, it will now get worse before it ever gets better.

No humour recession
One of the positive sides to e-mail must be how we can send each other jokes, keeping in touch with long lost friends from all around the world – telling the recipient I'm still thinking of you.

I received some the other day about how the recession might affect people – amongst the best were a mock-up photo of Her Majesty in a Macdonald's uniform with the words "Will one be wanting fries with that?", a Tesco advert with the strap-line "Because you're worthless" and a Who Wants to be a Millionaire logo that instead says "Who wants a full tank of petrol?"

Thankfully there's no recession in humour.
