THIS week the Scottish charities regulator decided that four of the 11 schools it has so far reviewed would need to raise their game if they were to remain charities.

It made me wonder just what is a charity these days, and is there a problem with independent schools being charities? 

I immediately thought of my recent trips to Manchester and Birmingham to observe the Labour and Conservative conferences, and hoADVERTISEMENTw I was assailed by various campaigns masquerading as charities. 

Shelter was the body most in everyone's face, handing out at Manchester some diddy little plastic compact mirrors asking Labour delegates to look at themselves, and at Birmingham giving away sponge-like red bricks telling Conservatives to build more homes. 

As if either of these expensive giveaways would make any difference. Laughed off by everyone, this waste of money spoke legions about an organisation that had crossed the line from good works to political campaigning.

Charities are not what they used to be. The common view is that they are there to give relief to the poor, the physically and mentally disabled and the underprivileged. Times have changed, no longer are charities full of well-meaning amateurs making sacrifices of their time and resources, now they are multi-million pound businesses employing an army of full-time fundraisers, campaigning for changes in law and telling us how our lifestyles are not just wrong but socially reprehensible – drinking alcohol and smoking tobacco, anyone?

It should come as no surprise then that in our modern world independent schools, such as Edinburgh's Merchiston Castle, that choose to be classified as charities – so that they might gain some tax benefits – should be asked to justify themselves. 

It should also come as no surprise that some should fail the test. Indeed, what is so surprising is that so many – two thirds – are passing with flying colours, suggesting that the ones that didn't pass have been complacent in adjusting to the new rules, or are arrogant, or just don't care.

Independent schools only have to show that they are able to demonstrate a public benefit. I admit that in the past I was rather sceptical of this new rule, accepting the previous dictum that all educational activities could be deemed as charitable. Now I recognise that some institutions might have been using this generalisation to pull the wool over our eyes.

What I ask, however, is that such a rigorous regime be applied to all charities – that those political campaigners that pretend they are charities be asked to show they are not single-issue campaigns, not some political groups without party political allegiance, but are of public benefit.

I also ask that for the sake of consistency we let all state schools qualify for charitable status. If we can allow all sorts of state-funded organisations such as theatres and galleries to have charitable wings then why not let Leith and Trinity Academies, Craigroyston or Portobello High Schools do the same? There is a huge well of giving and support that goes untapped because we make this false distinction between state and independent schools. Set the state schools free, let the headteachers run their schools and let the parents work with the former pupils to add to the community involvement.

But most of all, I merely ask that those independent schools that think it necessary to hide behind the falsehood that they are charities stop this practice forthwith. 

There's nothing wrong with making an honest profit. The charitable status probably makes a difference of £1000 a year to school fees – a sum that extremely wealthy parents can probably afford.

There is nothing wrong with being a school that makes a profit, just as there is nothing superior about being a school that is a charity. They all have their place in the world. Denying the success of making a profit is all part of the unedifying socialist cringe that Scotland has to lose – be we independent or in the Union.

When it comes to charities in Scotland, what we need is a bit more honesty.

Chick chopped
I recall playing regularly for the Scottish Parliament football team and how it was a fun event where only pride mattered enough for us to be concerned about who actually won on the day. That was enough to ensure we beat Westminster and the other teams three years in a row. 

I don't know what's happened in the last year or so to change things, but allowing their competitive spirit to take such a hold that the match against the Scottish press team last weekend had to be abandoned after 55 minutes – due to a scything tackle on Chick Young and some argy-bargy afterwards – suggests tensions at Holyrood are infecting even the social life. 

While John Park, the Labour MSP that was red-carded for hacking Chick Young, might be in the doghouse for his rash challenge, he can probably console himself that many of his electors will wish they'd had the same chance to bring down the radio celebrity. 

Such is the price of fame for Chick Young and media celebrities.
