THE small assembly of rather embarrassed anonymous people, so uncomfortable with each other that they avoided eye contact, sat in a circle on the orange plastic stackable chairs. One seat was empty, for a newcomer to the group was expected any moment. They all stared at the floor not wishing to spook the large hulk of a man who appeared in an ill-fitting business suit. The tailoring looked like it had once been made to measure, but like the occupant's recent run of results the physique wa
Now sitting on the uncomfortable 70s chair, the like of which he remembered from his rectorial days when young men and women gasped at his every word, he forced a cough to clear his throat and plucked up the necessary courage to say the words he had yet to utter in public – but this was a start . . .

"My name is Gordon, and I am a gambler."

Gordon began to tell his story and his captive audience kept its silence, but for the occasional gasp as he admitted to some of his more outrageous bets.

"It all started in 1997 when I adopted the Tories' own tight spending plans", he said. "I thought I was on a winning streak, even Ken Clarke said he would probably have spent more than I did. But I stuck to the gambit and kept restricting my money to prudence, soon she became the favourite of all the other tipsters. My name was being talked up by everyone, not least myself of course, and my winnings just kept snowballing as for the first couple of years the tight ship I ran brought home the bacon and my revenues climbed"

"Then I started getting a bit cocky. Thinking I walked on water and could do no wrong I gambled with the nation's gold reserves by running a public auction that lost a packet – £4.7 billion to be exact.

"I also gambled with the nation's pensions, removing the tax advantage that encouraged people to save for their retirement. Britain's pensions took a massive hit and have been deteriorating ever since.

"Everybody seemed to be effortlessly making money so I thought why can't I? 

"I went on a spending spree and gambled that it would bring in more and more winnings, but it didn't. In fact the winnings started falling dramatically – people couldn't afford to pay their taxes or changed their habits to avoid them.

"I then tried increasing my gambling to win back my losses, but instead I just kept losing money – my tax revenues were collapsing faster and I had to keep on borrowing more to stay in the game. Now I'm in hock to every loan shark on the street and my boys will have to put the screws on people next year so I can increase my takings to keep up my habit."

His onlookers realised they had a really bad addict who was in way over his head.

The crumpled, fallen figure went on: "Behind closed doors everybody close to me is telling me to get a grip, to find my own way out of the mess, but gambling with other people's money is all that I know. Last month I borrowed £18.5bn to reduce VAT for a year and already that horse has been put down after falling at the first hurdle. I borrowed twice that again to help the banks stay in the handicap chase but already their trainers are saying it's not enough.

"I've had to gamble another £10bn on a loan guarantee scheme but already there's talk of a steward's inquiry as my roll-up is being criticised by business leaders as too little too late.

"Just this week I offered £2500 to companies for every person they hire that has been unemployed for more than six months – but already that's been declared a non-runner as it will give incentives to release existing workers and then rehire others that have been on the dole already.

"I'm at my wits' end. A son of the manse, I thought I had a moral compass but in fact I was simply satisfying my craving for power at others' expense. Instead of gambling with other people's money, I should have let them keep it and do with it what they thought was best.

"I need help, I've even refused all calls from Greenspan and that guy Krugman that just won the Noble prize for economics. Please, please can anyone help me?"

Gordon was welcomed into the group with handshakes and hugs. It was a beginning and he felt better already. 

Now all he had to do was go through the same ordeal again live on television to the British people at a soon to be arranged school prizegiving – for Mandelson had already sold the exclusive rights to Channel Seven in return for a £20 million loan to the Labour Party by one of its directors so that it would not breach Ofcom rules – then people might give him some money again.

Once a gambler . . .
