Older patients are often treated with less aggressive treatment. Sometimes that is necessary and correct, and sometimes it is actually harmful to the older individual. Older patients tend to have more “co-morbidities,” chronic illnesses which result in poorer tolerance to treatments. In sicker patients, use of medications, and decisions about surgery should be made much more carefully because of potential side effects that can result in serious toxic illnesses or even death. It is important, however, to know that elderly patients who are otherwise well can tolerate even aggressive treatments very successfully. 

In recent summaries, which have looked at the outcomes of elderly patients over 70 years of age compared to young patients less than 70 years of age, tolerance to very aggressive surgical treatments have shown to be equally effective in the older and younger individuals. Even resection of liver for widespread cancer has resulted in outcomes that are nearly as good for older patients as for younger patients. Patients over 70 had a five-year survival of 37  percent following resection of cancer metastases in the liver, compared to a 44 percent survival in patients under the age of 70. If all “older” patients had been denied this aggressive treatment, cures would have been less common and patients would have unnecessarily died. 

Because of this, there has developed an important standard of care in cancer patients: elderly patients should be treated the same as younger patients provided they are fit and not frail. Just as Geriatrics and Gerontology have become recognized specialties, so to under the guidance of national leaders such as Dr. B. J. Kennedy and Dr. Lodovico Balducci, Geriatric Oncology has become a subspecialty in cancer care. In addition, the specialties of geriatrics and gerontology have become accepted specialties. Physicians trained in these areas of medicine understand the necessity for detecting problems in older patients (undiagnosed chronic illnesses, reduced function of liver, kidneys, heart, lungs, etc.), and their advice can help to make decisions about the appropriateness of intensive or complex treatments for elderly patients.

The take home message from this week’s column is if you are elderly, be certain that you have asked your physician about the very best treatments for your condition, and whether you can tolerate them. Make certain they understand that if you are fit, you do not wish to have your treatments limited by your chronological age. Also be certain that your doctor is checking the function of your various organs to make certain that all diagnoses of chronic conditions are found at the earliest possible time when they can be stabilized or improved. 

In addition, if you have family members or friends who are elderly, be certain you engage them in conversations about the importance of not looking upon themselves as old and ineligible for important needed treatment. If they are fit, they need the best treatments: no handling of them with “kid gloves” unless they are otherwise ill.

It is not about age, it is really about fitness and frailty. Be certain you take all of the steps to avoid becoming frail and remaining fit, and then make certain that you get all of the appropriate care which you deserve. 
