Cancer is one of the most common diseases in America. Since 1 of every 2 men and 1 out of every 3 women get cancer during their life, it’s very likely you have had a family member with cancer. So knowing how to deal with the issue of survivorship is important both for the patient as well as the family. This information will help your family and friends in dealing with survivorship not only from cancer, but also from other serious chronic diseases.

Two recent articles have emphasized the difficulties for patients to receive all the proper care after completion of their cancer treatments.  One would think this would be a relatively simple task, but it is hardly that!  

In a study by Dr. C. Snyder of Johns Hopkins Medical School and her colleagues (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, Page 1073, 2008), the outcomes of over 1,500 cancer patients with colorectal cancer were evaluated according to whether they were followed up by their primary care physician, by their oncologist, or by both. This study showed that following the surgery, chemotherapy and radiation, the quality of medical care received by the patient varied considerably according to which doctors saw the patient.  

If primary care physicians were seeing the patient after the cancer treatment, there was much better compliance with recommended vaccinations, cholesterol screening and bone density checkups. This indicated that common illnesses were being looked after much better by the primary care physician.  In contrast, if patients were seeing oncologists there was much more compliance with recommended schedules for mammograms and cervical cancer screening.  This indicated that oncologists were mostly focused on early detection of cancer, rather than non-cancer illnesses.  If patients saw both primary care physicians and oncologists, care coordination was greatest. However, only 2,100 out of 7,700 patients were seeing both primary care physicians and oncologists. Over 4000 saw only their primary care physician, while only 500 saw only their oncologist.  Worst of all, 1,000 patients saw neither their primary care doctor nor their cancer specialist! This indicates that co-management between a primary care physician and an oncologist results in the most optimal patient care. I am sure the same can be said about care after heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, arthritis, and major surgery: you need to see both your primary doctor and the specialist to get best care!

The Institute of Medicine issued a report “From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition” that emphasized that the quality of follow-up care after cancer cure is less than optimal. A study by Dr. P. Ganz and Dr. E. Hahn from the University of California of Los Angeles Medical School and the LIVE STRONG Survivorship Center (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, Page 759, 2008) evaluated the necessity for a long term survivorship care plan in patients after breast cancer treatments had been completed.  The conclusions of their report indicated that a comprehensive plan should be developed for cancer survivorship. Such a detailed plan must include detection of second cancers, evaluation of late effects of the cancer treatments (such as infertility, menopausal symptoms, and lymphedema) as well as long term side effects of medications (such as osteoporosis and fatigue) in order to optimize patient care.  Similar types of patient survivorship care plans for other cancers and other illnesses are under development by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and by other speciality organizations.

What does this mean for you?  If you are a cancer survivor, or if you have a cancer survivor in your family, you should ask “Has the doctor prepared a cancer survivorship plan?” If there is a plan, and you have been given a copy, then you are getting the currently recommended appropriate care. However, you should also know that you have to be following up with not only your oncologist, but also with your primary care physician.  

If there is no such survivorship plan, you should ask your oncologist or nurse for a plan that covers all the issues mentioned above, and make certain that you share that plan also with your primary care physician so that all of the appropriate tests, preventive treatments (such as vaccinations) and appropriate long term care is made available to you.  In that way, you can live the happiest, longest, and healthiest life possible.  

No one individual doctor can take responsibility alone for all your chronic care conditions as well as general health needs.  Coordination among your physicians is important regardless of whether you have cancer, or other chronic illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, bone disease, or mental health problems.
