Low bone density, also called osteopenia or osteoporosis, is common in postmenopausal women. Women are used to getting bone density tests (DEXA scans), and frequently take calcium and vitamin D supplements to keep bones healthy. But men in the United States usually don’t realize that they too can suffer from low bone density. Osteoporosis occurs in older men without any other conditions, but the risk of osteoporosis is increased in men who have low testosterone levels, take steroids (for asthma, emphysema, arthritis, or other conditions), and/or use alcohol excessively. Since there is an increasing frequency of vitamin D deficiency in Americans (due to lower sun exposure, use of sunscreens, and lack of vitamin D intake in milk), and since men are getting less calcium in their diets, osteoporosis is becoming more prevalent. Men who do not exercise, who are frail, or who are bedridden for chronic conditions also can develop osteoporosis.

Is this a significant problem? One in four men over the age of 50 experiences a fracture of a bone. When they do so, men are more likely than women to die after a hip fracture. In fact, one-third of all hip fractures occur in men, not in women.   

The most common malignancy in men is prostate cancer. A common therapy for this is androgen deprivation therapy. The most common such treatment is injection of medications which lower the testosterone level (Lupron and Zoladex are most usual). Men who have been receiving these treatments to reduce testosterone levels may be at increased risk of osteoporosis. 

In a recent article, Dr. S. Greenspan of the University of Pittsburg and her colleagues did a study of men with prostate cancer and evaluated their rate of osteoporosis (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, page 4426, 2008). In this study of over 100 men who were receiving androgen deprivation therapy for their prostate cancer, bone treatments were compared: alendronate pills or just a placebo. At the end of 2 years, the frequency of osteoporosis was much higher in patients who had not received alendronate. After 2 years, 54 percent of patients who had received only the placebo had developed osteoporosis, and 40 percent in addition had osteopenia (weak bones but not as severe as osteoporosis). Only 6 percent of those patients had a normal bone density. In contrast, 20 percent of patients who had received alendronate had a normal bone density with 56 percent having osteopenia and only 24 percent having osteoporosis. 

These results demonstrate that osteoporosis is extraordinarily common in men receiving hormonal therapy for prostate cancer. These studies indicate that pills such as aledronate may be able to prevent much of the osteoporosis. Other studies have indicated that injectable medications such as Aredia or Zometa can also reduce the frequency of osteoporosis. 

Men who have received hormonal treatment for prostate cancer had a 45 percent increase in the risk of fractures of bones, compared to men who had never had hormonal treatment for prostate cancer. This indicates that in order to prevent bone fractures in men, physicians must be aware of the need for monitoring bone density and giving appropriate pills or shots to treat this.

The implications of this are important. Low bone density in men is common. If you are a man, ask your physician to begin to monitor your bone density after you have reached the age of 50. and if you have had prostate cancer, be certain your physician is monitoring your bones closely for reduced bone density and risk of fracture. If you are a woman, be certain that the important men in your lives know to monitor their bone density after they are over 50. 
