Many patients are taking lots of medications, and undergoing treatments for their acute and chronic conditions. Recently, an article was published which looked at the side effects of these medications and treatments and how this influenced how satisfied patients were with their medical care.

Dr. Petra Feyer and the co-workers in Germany published their article in Supportive Care in Cancer (Volume 16, page 567, 2008). The study looked at over 4,500 patients with cancer. The patients were asked about problems that they were having during their treatments, and the satisfaction that they had with their medical care. Amazingly, the average number of side effects that each patient had was five! In fact, some patients had up to 17 different side effects from their medications and treatments, indicating that not only the disease, but also the treatments themselves can produce problems that need to be improved. 

The patients reported that the most frequent side effects were fatigue in 60%, hair loss in 54%, nausea in 51%, sleep disturbance in a surprisingly high 42%, weight loss in 36%, diarrhea in 32%, and mouth ulcerations in 31%. The patients also found other disturbing problems with sexual function, changes in mood, and bleeding. 

In association with these problems with medications, more than 30% of the patients reported problems with the way in which these side effects were handled by the treatment team. The patients who had most severe fatigue also had the greatest degree of dissatisfaction with their treatments. The more severe the fatigue, the more frequently the patient’s thought their care was poor. The greater the number of side effects, the greater the degree of dissatisfaction as might be expected. 

This study has important information for every patient. Since side effects from medications, both prescription medications and over-the-counter medications, are common, it is important for patients to tell the physician or the physician’s staff of all side effects that are occurring. Sometimes there may be quite a few side effects from either the disease or the medications or the treatments, so keeping a log that you can share with your physician is very important. 

In addition, you should expect the physician and the physician’s staff to address each and every one of these side effects so that the quality of your care remains high. Just saying “it’s okay we will just watch it” is not enough, since most side effects can be improved by a change in medication, a change in dosage, or the addition of other medicines that can relieve side effects. 

We all want the most effective care, and maintaining close dialogue between patients and physicians helps to achieve the most sophisticated and beneficial decision making that is in the patient’s best interest in order to control disease and improve the quality of life. Unfortunately, as indicated in a previous article, many patients just simply stop taking their medications when they have a problem. This is NOT the way to deal with side effects. Getting the entire treatment team together, the patient, the caregiver, the physician, and the physician’s staff, always helps to identify the problems and work out solutions that help. 
