No one wants to get cancer, and if cancer is going to be found, one wants to find it at the earliest stage when it is most highly curable. Everyone agrees with this statement. However, despite the fact that we have good evidence that breast cancer screening, cervical cancer screening, and colon cancer screening all improve the length of life of patients, the situation is confusing for prostate cancer. 

Why is this? Prostate cancer when it is detected is usually treated either immediately with surgery or radiation therapy, or after a period of “watchful waiting” (also called active surveillance). Since this disease is often found in older men, those individuals most often die from some other illness such as heart disease or other cancer, before prostate cancer itself ever causes death. However, 20 percent of men who get prostate cancer still die from that cancer itself rather than from some other illness.

Primary care physicians, internists, urologists, and oncologists usually recommend screening for prostate cancer. Recently, however, the United States Preventive Services Task Force reviewed their recommendations for screening for prostate cancer and made a recommendation that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of harms in screening for men younger than 75. They also recommended against screening for prostate cancer in men older than 75 (Annals of Internal Medicine, Volume 149, pages 185-199, 2008). The members of the task force found no good quality randomized, controlled trials of screening for prostate cancer! Indeed, there were very few studies of any kind that could lead to a definite conclusion. Therefore, since treatment itself has some side effects and there was no evidence for definite improvement in overall survival of at least half of the patients, the task force was forced to conclude that there was insufficient evidence for men under 75, and that men over 75 should not be screened with the PSA test. 

However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force failed to consider that many men with prostate cancer are, indeed, symptomatic and that this is not “screening” as much as evaluation of the cause of symptoms, such as urination at night, slowing of the urinary stream, difficulty in initiating urination, or pain or discomfort in the region of the bladder or base of the penis. Because of this, evaluation (rather than screening) by using digital rectal examination, PSA, free PSA, and/or prostate ultrasound is appropriate for men who have any symptoms at all, or for men without symptoms who have a family history of prostate cancer. 

Furthermore, an important additional publication has recently appeared. Dr. Grace Lu-Yao and her co-workers from the Robert Woods Johnson Medical School and Cancer Institute of New Jersey studied over 19,000 men who had stage 1-2 prostate cancer between 1992 and 2002 (JAMA, Volume 300, page 173, 2008). This study showed that in men who had low-grade prostate cancer, the ten year overall survival was 30 percent regardless of whether those men received just watchful waiting or received immediate hormonal therapy. However, in men who had poorly differentiated prostate cancer, there was a 16 percent improvement in survival from prostate cancer if the patients received immediate hormonal therapy. This indicates that earlier diagnosis of men with prostate cancer so as to determine whether hormonal therapy is appropriate (and also whether surgery or radiation therapy is appropriate), is beneficial to men. This article was not considered by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force when they made their review.

So what are you as a careful, cautious individual to do? It seems to me that the most reasonable approach is to have prostate cancer screening. If prostate cancer is detected, therapy may not be immediately necessary if that cancer is a very low-grade cancer, a small cancer, and a very small tumor of low stage. This is especially true if the patient has a natural life expectancy of under five years. 

However, if the tumor is of moderate or higher-grade, is larger, is associated with symptoms, or shows any dangerous characteristics, or if the patient’s life expectancy is over five years, appropriate early therapy should be initiated by the oncologist or urologist. 

Lastly, if a patient has a history of prostate cancer in the family, or is of African-American ancestry, or has a high frequency of possibly hereditary breast cancer in the family, screening for prostate cancer is appropriate starting at age 40.
