We all know that complications (also called adverse events) can occur during hospitalizations. Hospitals usually have reported complication rates with a frequency of 5-10% based on their medical records. However, recent evidence suggests that this does not tell the entire story.

An article by Dr. Joel Weissman and his colleagues from Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard School of Public Health indicates that the medical records underestimate how frequently adverse events actually take place. An analysis of over 4,000 patients who had been discharged from hospitals found that in approximately 1,000 patients studied intensively, the frequency of complications during the course of hospitalization that was reported by the patients themselves was found to be much higher (23%) compared to the complication rate which was recorded in the medical record (11%). This striking difference was due to the patients describing many different types of complications that no doctors or nurses mentioned in the medical record. 

The complication rate in women, 27%, was slightly higher than men, 19%, according to the interviews with the patients, but was only 11% and 10%, respectively, according to the medical record. Therefore, women tend to have complications slightly more frequently than men, but medical records have not indicated that important difference. Surprisingly, young patients tended to have more complications than older patients. 42% of the Patients between 18 and 44 years of age had a self-reported 42% complication rate compared to 27% between ages 49 to 59, and 16% of patients over 60. 

Also unexpectedly, patients who were previously in excellent or very good health had 23% complications, compared to 24% complications in patients who were of fair or poor health before hospitalization. One would have expected more complications in unhealthy patients, but this was not the case!

As might be expected, patients who stayed in the hospital longer tended to have a higher rate of complications. Only 13% of patients who stayed in one to two days had complications compared to 20% of the patients who stayed 3 days, 26% of the patients who stayed 4 to 5 days, and 30% in the patients who stayed more than 6 days. 

What kinds of complications were observed in the hospital?

Adverse drug effect 50%
hospital-based infections 20%
infections at the site of surgery or trauma 11%
nerve injury that occurred from an operation 9%
urinary infections obtained during the course of the hospital stay 5%
taking a fall during the course of stay 7%
pressure sores 6%
Notably, 37% of patients had complications that were probably or definitely preventable.

What does this mean for patients who are going into the hospital? First, make certain that you do NOT enter any hospital unless you absolutely have to. See if treatment can be obtained in your physician’s office, or through a home care agency.

Secondly, make certain that your surgeon is an experienced surgeon so the frequency of surgical complications is reduced. Operative nerve injury may be less if less extensive surgery is performed, and this may be possible with doctors who know how to perform video-assisted surgery or perform less extensive procedures to gain the same curative benefits. Also, be certain that nurses and hospital personnel wash their hands before they touch you so that infections of any type can be minimized.

Since falls are common, make certain that you are assisted in walking with a nurse or family member. Bed sores are a frequent complication, particularly in longer stays, so be certain that you have appropriate mattresses (egg-crate or variable pressure mattresses), so that pressure sores are less likely to occur. Since clots can occur, be certain that you ask your nurses and doctors if there is any treatment necessary for your legs to prevent blood clots (like blood thinners or compressive leg stockings).

With adverse drug events occuring in more than 50% of patients, you need to be certain that you talk over your medications with your nurse and also with the hospital pharmacist so you can be certain what complications might occur, and that all possible drug interactions can be identified. Also check each pill you are given to be sure you know what it’s being used for, and that the pill is actually yours!

Lastly, since length of stay is related to frequency of complications, always be certain that you try to be discharged as rapidly as possible rather than asking for a few more days in the hospital.

Always let your physician know that you are concerned about the rate of adverse events in hospitals so that you can obtain the best possible care.

