Today’s American health care system is one of the highest quality care programs in the world. Patients flock to the United States from foreign countries to access our health care system for treatment of serious and life-threatening conditions. But there is a growing concern regarding the quality of care we receive in our health care system.

In a recent commentary, Dr. T. Frieden and co-authors (JAMA ,February 27, 2008) called attention to some of the areas in which our American health care system is NOT achieving the best results for patients. Despite the fact that 90 percent of Americans with severe cholesterol elevation, high blood pressure, and/or diabetes have adequate health insurance, the quality of control of their disease is less than acceptable. Less than half of patients with diabetes, about one-third of patients with high blood pressure, and only a quarter of patients with high cholesterol have adequate control of their disease. In addition, overweight patients are often not receiving weight control programs, and smokers are not always being helped in their attempts to quit by nurses and physicians. 

Elections always bring up health care as a major problem. Both Democrats and Republicans are seeking to change the health care system by increasing access to doctors and hospitals, and by decreasing costs. 

Dr. Frieden and his co-authors from the New York City Health Department have called for changes that provide increased payment for disease prevention and effective management of chronic illness, increased information technology both within practices and also for patients that deal with disease prevention, and a change in accountability in doctors’ offices. In their commentary, the authors suggested that physician use of an Electronic Health Record in the doctor’s office maybe a solution, since the Veteran’s Administration has used its Electronic Health Record to better outcomes in care of chronic diseases. Similar studies in private practices suggest that Electronic Health Records may help, but only if doctors and managers within a practice truly use the system to improve your care. These changes are expensive, and will take time to change patterns of care that people receive. But you can help change your own care now, and make sure that YOU are receiving the best care.

First, let’s look at the underlying reasons why we have such poor outcomes in taking care of many common chronic diseases despite being able to perform the best heart transplants, cancer care, and sophisticated operations in the world. 

The first reason is that generally insurance plans in our American health system pay for treating illness, not for preventing it. Public health systems cover only a few screening procedures, and almost never pay physicians to perform preventive care. But they are able to do good preventive care if they know you are expecting them to do so.

The insurance system is not solely to blame. Physicians are trained throughout their career to treat illness. As practices become busier with insurance and health record requirements, physicians and nurses become too busy to pay attention to prevention and instead become increasingly focused on treating serious illness. Almost never are physicians asked about disease prevention by their patients. Patients themselves rarely check to see if they are achieving the best results. Here, too, you can play an important role in getting yourself excellent care.

One of the best solutions to this problem of poor outcomes is to make certain that any usual disease that can interfere with long life have been adequately diagnosed, and prevented. You should know your blood pressure, your cholesterol, your fasting blood sugar, and your optimal weight. You should know your body mass index and whether this is in a safe range or a dangerous range. You should have discussed your lifestyle (smoking, drinking, medications, and drugs) as well as your diet and exercise patterns with your physician. 

Your physician and his/her staff should have discussed with you your own personal goal for each of these areas. In addition, the pattern of illness in your family should have been discussed so that you have all the tests to detect any problems as soon as any become apparent, such as cancer, blood clots, bleeding problems, mental health problems, cardiac conditions, autoimmune disorders, and kidney disease.

You must take the responsibility to ask your physician how well you have achieved your own goals for blood pressure, sugar, cholesterol, and weight. You must expect your doctor to have ordered adequate screening tests for serious conditions. You must know that your doctor is tracking your personal treatments, as often as every three months if necessary. 

Once you had a serious illness, you should know that it is under control by having frequent visits for monitoring. As well, you should use the internet to understand important questions you must ask about your health and/or illness, and must expect answers to those questions when you see your doctor. Lastly, you should get a copy of your doctor’s note and make certain you can understand it, and keep it in your health record for use when you need a follow up appointment with a specialist, or a second opinion regarding your care. 

Do not ever accept less than excellent results in your health care. Our American health care system is too good to let your care be inadequate. 
