Health care is, of course, becoming more and more expensive. The cost of tests has gone up dramatically, the cost of medications is increasing, and with it the personal financial burden that every patient must endure is more daunting. 

Two studies have recently given us more evidence of how important your personal health care decisions are in maintaining your health, even if those decisions are expensive. The first study is a report from the Center for Studying Health System Change. In their analysis, more patients are delaying health care or actually going without health care, even though they may have symptoms or health care needs. 

Compared to 2003, people in 2007 more commonly went TOTALLY WITHOUT health care. If people had insurance, 6.3% went without medical care in 2007 compared to 3.9% in 2003. If patients lacked medical insurance, 17.5% decided not to have medical care in 2007 compared to 13.2% in 2003. 

According to this study, similar results were seen in DELAYING care. If patients had no medical insurance, 20% delayed their care in 2007 compared to only 16.1% in 2003. Surprisingly, even if patients had medical insurance, 11% delayed medical care in 2007, while only 7.2% delayed care in 2003. This is likely due to the increased costs of co-payments, increased cost of care, and more difficulty in excessing the health care system affordably. 

In another study confirming this information, J. Wharam and his colleagues from Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Plan studied how frequently patients were participating in screening programs for cancer (Annals of Internal Medicine, Volume 148, page 647, 2008). In their study of over 30,000 people from Harvard Pilgrim Health Plan (over 3,000 patients with a high-deductable health plan and 27,000 HMO members), they evaluated whether switching to a high-deductable health plan influenced the use of cancer screening. After a person changed their insurance to a high deductable health plan, with increased out of pocket costs for studies such as colonoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or double contrast barium enema, the use of those screening procedures for colon cancer were reduced by 27% compared to people who continued to be HMO members. However, when they looked at the use of inexpensive screening programs for breast cancer (mammogram) or cervical cancer (pap smear), there was no change in the use of those less costly screening procedures. 

These two studies indicate that many Americans are trying to save money on health care by no longer getting tests or examinations that are vital to their health. If someone has symptoms, they are not getting professional advice for optimal care. And despite knowing what screening programs can prevent a life threatening illness, patients are getting only the inexpensive tests, rather than using all of the screening procedures necessary to maintain their health. 

These results indicate that it is increasingly important for you to make a personal commitment to seeing a doctor or health care provider at the first signs of illness, and to getting the appropriate care until you are well. It also indicates that you should be increasingly aware of all the screening tests which are needed at various ages, and should be aggressive about continuing to pursue them so that serious illnesses do not develop to the point that they are no longer curable or treatable. 

For further information, contact your doctor and make certain that your illnesses are treated and prevented appropriately.

