Exercise is important in everyone. We know that exercise reduces the risk of heart disease, obesity, bone disease, and fatigue. Recent evidence also indicates that physical exercise reduces the frequency of breast cancer, colon cancer, and possibly prostate cancer. 

In addition, a new study also indicates that in women who have had breast cancer, physical activity and exercise is extremely important. Dr. Melinda Irwin of Yale University School of Medicine and her co-authors studied over 900 women in the Health Eating Activity and Lifestyle Study from 1995 through 2004 (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, page 3958, 2008). 

The women in this important study had breast cancer, and were evaluated according to the level of exercise they had per week. Compared to inactive women, women who performed two to three hours of brisk walking per week had a reduction in death rate of 31%! In those who were active not only before diagnosis, but also after diagnosis, the reduction in risk of death was 67%. If women were inactive before the diagnosis of breast cancer and increased their physical activity after the diagnosis, their risk of death was reduced by 45%, while women who had a diagnosis of breast cancer and decreased their physical activity after diagnosis had a 395% increased risk of death. 

These results are extraordinary because they demonstrate that not only does exercise reduce the risk of breast cancer by 30 to 40% compared to sedentary women, but increasing physical activity after breast cancer diagnosis reduces the risk that cancer will come back and produce death! This is in addition to the benefits that can be obtained by treatment with appropriate surgery, radiation, hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, and/or antibody therapy. 

What should everyone take away from this? Exercise continues to be shown to be increasingly important to all of us. If we are not exercising now, we need to discuss that with our physicians, and on our own with our health, increase our level of exercise. We may increase it only by 10 minutes a day, 15 minutes a day, or 30 minutes a day, but that added increased activity will result in a healthier cardiovascular system, and a reduction in the risk of cancer deaths!

Remember that the amount of exercise needed to make a difference in the outcome of these women with breast cancer was only 2 to 3 hours weekly. And also be aware that the amount of exercise necessary to reduce the risk of getting breast cancer is only 30 minutes per day most days, according to the Mayo Clinic. So it’s time to get out the sneakers or athletic shoes, and stop being a couch potato! Make exercise a part of your daily schedule.
 

