Ovarian cancer is a common condition in women. It is a very serious cancer because the cure rate is low due to late diagnosis. Ovarian cancer is most frequently discovered when patients are in advanced stages III and IV, rather than more curable stage I and II. So for all women, it is important to recognize risk factors that increase risk of this disease, and how to prevent this cancer. 

Cancer of the ovary is often associated with a history of ovarian cancer in the family, or a family history of breast cancer at young age. In some women, a gene mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes dramatically increases the risk of developing cancer of the ovary and/or breast. 

In order to lower the risk of ovarian cancer, many women have taken birth control pills. In women who have taken at least five years of birth control pills, the risk of ovarian cancer is reduced by 35 percent. This protective effect remains even if one has taken the birth control pills intermittently, rather than continuously. So when considering contraception, it is important to realize this important benefit of birth control pills rather than other methods.

But now there is another complementary approach that has been identified. In a recent article by Dr. Y. Song of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and co-authors (Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention, Volume 17, Page 712, 2008), the authors analyzed the risks of ovarian cancer according to the intake of coffee, tea, and caffeinated beverages. Since caffeine induces an enzyme called CYP1A2 which can activate cancer producing chemicals (carcinogens), the doctors feared that caffeine might be associated with an increased risk of cancer. Their results showed that neither caffeinated nor decaffeinated coffee changed the risk of ovarian cancer. Similarly, carbonated soft drinks containing caffeine (for example colas) did not increase risk at one to two cans per day, but over two cans per day did increase risk by 50 percent compared to non-drinkers. The total amount of caffeine ingested per day was not associated with any increase in risk when all sources of coffee, tea, and soft drinks were considered. 

However, the really important finding was that drinking green tea was associated with a markedly decreased risk of ovarian cancer. Women who drank more than one cup of green tea per day had a 54 percent reduction in the risk of ovarian cancer. This applied not only to Asian women who drank green tea, but also to non-Asian women. Black teas, however, were not associated with reduced risk of ovarian cancer. 

These results are important for all women. Green tea is not only socially acceptable, but it is almost universally found in supermarkets and restaurants. Taking two or more cups per day can be an important ovarian preventive. 

Lastly, it is important to realize that early diagnosis of ovarian cancer is important in getting the highest cure rates. Therefore, women should discuss with their physicians whether they have any of the early warning symptoms of ovarian cancer. These include any abdominal or pelvic fullness, pain, genital bleeding symptoms, genital discomfort, persistent feeling of fullness after eating, weight loss, abdominal swelling, excess gas, worsening indigestion, persistent nausea, persistent constipation or diarrhea, and/or any vaginal discharge. If you have any of these symptoms, you must be certain either your primary care physician or your gynecologist performs a good physical examinations as well as transvaginal ultrasound and the blood tumor marker test CA125 to diagnose ovarian cancer at the earliest stage. Women with a family history of ovarian cancer should have gene testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to determine if there are mutations which could lead to increased risk. Any woman with a mutation in either of those genes should have annual trans-vaginal ultrasound exams and tumor marker testing for early diagnosis of ovarian cancer. 
