Exercise we know is important! Physical inactivity produces obesity and with that, diabetes, heart disease, and other chronic illnesses in old age. Exercise is also extremely important in our children. Experts suggest that children should have a minimum of 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity every day, and this standard has been adopted by the US Department of Agriculture. We should know this recommendation, and every pediatrician and children’s clinic should be educating parents about this. 

We all encourage our children to exercise. But are they achieving the minimum 60 minutes of moderate exercise (or more) daily which doctors and the government know is associated with better health? In order to answer this question, Dr. Philip Nader of the University of California San Diego and his co-authors (JAMA, Volume 300, page 295, 2008) studied over 1,000 children between the ages of 9 and 15 who were enrolled in the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Childcare. This was a wide-based study, and included children from Arkansas, California, Kansas, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, North Carolina, and Wisconsin! 

The findings were important. At the age of 9 years, children engaged in moderate or vigorous physical activity approximately 3 hours per day both on weekends and weekdays. That is a terrific pattern of healthy behavior.

However, as time went on, every year children spent 38 to 41 minutes less each day engaged in these activities. By the time they had reached the age of 15, these children and adolescents were only having 49 minutes each weekday in these exercise activities and only 35 minutes per day each weekend. Although boys were more than active girls by about 15 minutes per day, both boys and girls decreased their activity at the same rate each year. 

This indicates that in America, we have a crisis with our children. As they decrease their level of physical activity, they become more prone to problems such as diabetes, high blood pressure, and cardiac disease as well as cancer. And we have all been told of the epidemic of childhood and adolescent obesity leading to diseases and shortened lives. This reduction of exercise and activity contributes to the obesity problem.

The recommendations from this for us are quite clear. Check your children, and your nieces and nephews to determine how much physical activity of moderate or vigorous quality they are performing per day. If they are over 60 minutes, they are doing great! If they are under 60 minutes, explore what can be done to increase their level of physical activity so that their future can be a healthy one. 

Check with the pediatrician or the office staff to be certain they are aware of the amount of activity the child is having. Get recommendations about how to change and promote a healthier lifestyle. Above, all, make sure that sedentary activities (watching television, playing computer games, e-mailing and texting, for example) don’t replace more active sports and physical activity participation that can promote better health and socialization.
