Lung cancer is a big health problem, since it is the most common cause of cancer deaths in both men and women! And everyone knows what is the most common cause of lung cancer: smoking. Not to mention that smoking also causes heart and lung diseases, shortness of breath, heart attacks, emphysema, bronchitis, mouth and voicebox cancers, bladder and stomach cancer, and possibly also breast cancer. 

We have always been told that stopping smoking reduces your risk of getting a lung cancer. It may also reduce your risk of getting breast cancer and leukemia. 

Patients have always asked me, "Well, how much does a reduction in smoking, or stopping smoking reduce my risk of getting cancer?"

A recent study by Dr. Y. Song and his co-workers at The Seoul National University in Korea (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, Page 5101, 2008) helps to answer this question. They studied patients from 1992 to 2003. When patients reduced their smoking from heavy smoking (over 20 cigarettes per day) to light smoking (less than 10 cigarettes per day), the risk of lung cancer was reduced by 37 percent. But even after cutting down, the lung cancer risk was still elevated compared to non-smokers. Lung cancer in heavy smokers was 9 times higher than the rate in pleople who had never smoked, and 5 times higher than the risk in people who had been ex-smokers for a long length of time. By reducing from heavy smoking to light smoking, the 32 percent reduction in risk of lung cancer was still over 2 times higher than the risk in people who had quit totally, 3.5 times higher than the risk of lung cancer in people who had quit for a long length of time, and still 6 times higher than the risk of people who had never smoked. 

These results were in contrast to other smoking related cancers. These other cancers, such as throat cancer, esophageal cancer, kidney cancer and pancreatic cancer were not reduced by reduction from heavy smoking to light smoking, but were reduced by 37 percent by quitting. These cancers were least frequent if patients had never smoked (two-thirds lower in never smokers compared to heavy smokers).

These results are important for us to understand if we are active smokers, or if we have family members who are smokers. Smoking reduction not only immediately reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease and pulmonary disease, but also reduces the risk of lung cancer. This is most notable if the patient totally quits, but is also improved if people reduced to light smoking. You should always discuss with your physician how you personally can reduce your risk of smoking and how you can avoid restarting smoking for the rest of your life. Although it is not easy, remember that almost every smoker wants to quit! And every study of the best way to quit uses a team approach: the patient, the family and friends, and the doctor who not only can advise, but also can prescribe medications to help you reduce your smoking.

In addition, if you are a family member of a smoker, you should work hard with that individual to help be a support group for helping that person to stop smoking. By continuing to offer your support in addition to their physician, you can immediately reduce the risk of smoking related diseases in that person. 
