Your colon is an important part of your body. The colon is the final six feet of your intestinal tract. It is the part of your body that determines how many bowel movements you have a day, and makes certain that you don't have diarrhea or constipation. It is also the source of many common symptoms: stomach pain, cramps, abdominal swelling, and bloating. Have you ever had any of these symptoms? Of course you have, since from early childhood these symptoms are part of daily life. 

Just what is normal for people? It's usual to have one bowel movement (stool) daily, one that is not excessively smelly, and is normal in consistency (not hard like a rock, and not soft like jelly or water). It is also normal for your stools to sink, rather than float or be yellow. Although occasionally people can have small amounts of grayish colored mucous in the stool, this should not be present continuously. NEVER should you have any blood in your stools! If your stools are not usually like this be sure to tell your doctor so tests can be done to see what's wrong. 

When people have excessive stools, or frank diarrhea, or when people have constipation and feel that they have to move their bowels but cannot, life changes from happiness to suffering and concern. So keeping your colon happy makes for a happy life.

The causes of abnormal bowel function are many, and figuring out what is wrong almost always requires a physician if the abnormality in bowel function is persistent. Diarrhea can be caused by food poisoning, bacteria, or bacterial toxins in food that you can pick up at restaurants or eating food that has been kept too long (but is usually self-limiting). As we all know from childhood on, gastrointestinal viruses (which cause gastroenteritis or colitis) can result in not only diarrhea but also vomiting, but are also short lived. Diverticulitis (an inflammation of little one-quarter inch pockets in the colon lining) can result in abnormal bowel function, usually pain and diarrhea. Serious bowel infections such as those caused by C. difficile (also called C-diff) can cause diarrhea and respond well to antibiotic treatment, as do other bacterial infections of the bowel. Irritable bowel syndrome and malabsorption can result in diarrhea that is intermittent and nearly life long, and need attention of a physician. More serious illnesses such as colon polyps and cancer of the colon can cause diarrhea and need the skills of a stomach specialist to diagnose them. Most important, diarrhea can be a symptom of underlying general diseases that are not specific to the gastrointestinal tract: diabetes, neurological diseases, liver diseases, gallbladder disease, and pancreatic disease. So persistent diarrhea needs the attention of you and your physician.

On the other extreme, constipation has multiple causes as well. Constipation can be due to medications, and a review of your prescriptions with your physician can help to determine if you need a change in treatments for other illnesses. Commonly, opiate medications such as codeine, Demerol, and morphine can cause very severe constipation, and these medications often need to be given with drugs which can prevent constipation. Constipation can also be caused by poor dietary choices as I'll mention later on. Serious illnesses that can have their first symptom of constipation include colon polyps, neurological disorders, and cancers of the colon or rectum. 

Both diarrhea and constipation can be very dangerous! The signs that should immediately cause you to telephone your doctor for an appointment are persistence of diarrhea or constipation for more than 3-4 weeks. If there is any bleeding AT ALL, even just once, call your doctor! If any of the following symptoms last 3-4 weeks or more, don't delay, just call your physician for a checkup: pain in the abdominal area, swelling, a change in weight, a lump in your abdomen, or bloating. 

What do I tell my patients to do for diarrhea? First, I tell them to watch their diet and eliminate any of the foods that can be associated with loose stools (prunes, beans, too much fiber, and too many vegetables). I recommend a BRAT diet for diarrhea (consisting of bananas, rice, applesauce and toast). For "over-the-counter" treatment of diarrhea, you should always have loperamide (also called Imodium) not only in your medicine cabinet for times when diarrhea strikes, but also in your cosmetic bag to take with you on vacation. Traveler's diarrhea can interrupt the most enjoyable of vacation plans! Prescription medications such as paregoric, or opiate medications such as codeine or morphine derivatives, can be helpful in severe illness.

What do I advise my patients for constipation? I always recommend taking prunes or prune juice with good helpings of fiber (vegetables, salad and/or bran). Over-the-counter medications that are helpful include milk of magnesia, Colace, Metamucil (always taken with enough water as indicated on the package), and Dulcolax. For more severe cases, I recommend suppositories, such as glycerine or Dulcolax, and in constipation that just won't go away with the above measures, I recommend enemas such as Fleet's enemas. Check with your doctor or nurse to see what is best for you.

The take home lesson from this weeks' column is: Keep your colon happy, keep your diet just right for your own intestines, and above all, if you have any danger signs, contact your physician at once.

