In a previous column, I have talked about getting your money's worth from your doctor visit. This week's column deals with a slightly different aspect of the physician visit: How to communicate most effectively with your doctor.

The results of face-to-face visits with your physician are most helpful if you've been told all of the important information, understand it, and remember it. Optimal communication is sometimes difficult because the physician visit is one of the scariest times in your life. What new illnesses may be found? Is an old condition getting worse? Is there some serious treatment or procedure you will need? How expensive will the medications be that will be responsible for preventing, treating, or curing a condition? 

The first and most important step you can take in communicating with the physician is to be certain that you have chosen a physician who is able to communicate well. Does the physician speak English (or the same language that you speak) and speak it well? Can the physician understand the information that you are telling them (you may need an interpreter if your primary language is not English)? When the doctor speaks, does he speak technical jargon, medical language, or with speech that you can understand? Will the physician answer all of your questions? If your answer to these questions is not uniformly yes, make certain that you talk to the office staff to see what can be done, or consider getting a second opinion about your primary care, any illness or condition, or any recommended treatments.

The next step you can take is also critical to your future health. You should take to the doctor's office a written list of questions, concerns, and symptoms to review with your physician. You can also bring in any information that you have found on the internet which raises a question that you want to review with your doctor. Having the primary information written out from the internet (a very simple process with today's high speed printers) gives you a reference that can be reviewed briefly with the physician, and can serve as a foundation for future inquiries as well as tests and treatments. Patients who bring in lists of questions, and any important information from the internet always get more value from their visit compared to patients who come in without an agenda for their visit.

The next step after your examination is to be certain that you are prepared to remember all of the information which the doctor gives you. The first logical step is to be certain that you have pen and paper to write down notes on what the physician has said (if you have forgotten, the receptionist always has pen and paper to lend you). Make certain that these notes contain not only the abnormalities and diagnoses which the doctor is considering, but also all of the aspects regarding tests, treatments, as well as screening procedures and preventive measures. 

Many of my patients ask if they can audiotape information I give them during my discussion of diagnoses, and recommendations, and treatment plan. I highly encourage my patients to do this, and on the average they listen to those audiotapes two to three times at home and even have their family listen to them at least twice. These patients get more out of our discussions than patients who poorly remember what I've recommended. 

Another very helpful step is to have another person join you during the office visit for listening to your complaints (and remind you if you left something out) and hearing the physician's advice, recommendations, and treatment plan. This person, sometimes called a "patient advocate" is usually a family member, but can also be a friend who is very interested in your care. Make certain that you bring someone who is not going to have an emotional crisis during the discussion of your illness, and someone whom you can trust to keep information confidential. Having someone else to share the responsibility of listening carefully to a doctor's advice helps to ensure that all of the right information is obtained. This gives you another set of eyes and ears to evaluate your doctor for quality of your healthcare. 

A last aspect of the communication that is important is to inquire whether there are National Guidelines or standards for the care of any of your conditions, or for screening and prevention of illnesses which you might get. For example, even if you are a healthy individual, what are the National Standards for vaccination, screening for illnesses such as heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and cancer, and prevention of those common conditions? If you have a family history of certain diseases, what are the National Guidelines for screening you for those conditions? 

By improving the level of communication between you and your physician and your physician's office staff, your medical care can improve dramatically, and your chances of having a serious illness or condition can be minimized. Get the best out of each and every physician visit, and never forget information that you have been given.

