A recent medical article from the National Institutes of Health and the University of Michigan re-emphasized a troubling fact: people who know they have a high risk of disease, who are given recommendations for tests or treatments, very often do not follow those recommendations. In Dr. Hadley's study, women were tested who had a gene mutation that results in a 90 percent likelihood of having cancers of the colon, small intestine, uterus, ovary, kidney, ureter, brain, or bile ducts (Lynch syndrome). They were checked to see how frequently they complied with recommendations for colonoscopy to find the most common cancer (colon cancer) and transvaginal ultrasound of the uterus (TVUS), which looks for the second most common cancer (uterine cancer). Remarkably, only 60 percent of the women had undergone a colonoscopy, and only 55 percent had TVUS. Since the lives of these women were so threatened by the possible development of these cancers, why didn't more women comply with the national guideline recommendations of performing these tests? 

First of all, is this unusual? No, because only 50 percent of women known to have a high likelihood of mutations that cause breast cancer actually make a decision to have the genetic testing. Very often they don't comply with recommendations for mammography, MRI testing of the breast, or prevention using medications. 

So just what is going on in a person's mind when they are told that they are at very high risk of having a bad health condition (possibly even life threatening), and then they refuse to have recommended tests or treatments to prevent these bad consequences? First, it is very hard for any of us to break lifelong habits. For example, smokers who have a 20 times higher chance of getting lung cancer frequently don't even try to stop their smoking habit, something that is truly addictive. 

Second, when tests are recommended (such as genetic screening, colonoscopy, mammography, or TVUS), there is a fear that the results might be positive and that this would require serious surgery that might not be successful. Many times patients are fatalistic, and think "If it's going to happen, just let it happen. I'll just roll the dice and take my chances." 

Third, very often patients have no insurance to pay for the needed tests. Usually physicians can work with such patients without insurance to find ways to get discounted services. 

Fourth, we know that a common way that people adjust to a crisis situation is avoidance. Simply say that the problem doesn't exist and one feels much better. Regrettably, most of the medical situations I have mentioned represent avoidance. 

So, what guidance can be given to help people follow the leader (the advice of the physician), rather than roll the dice, and just let fate take its course? The most important solution is to have support for making the right decision. The best support is a spouse, partner, or a health advocate. This person helps the patient to get recommended medical testing or treatment, even if the patient is initially reluctant. Many times, even though the patient is hesitant, they will go along with a close relative or friend's support and advice. An alternative is to be a part of a support group, a group of friends or a group of similarly affected individuals so that the patient realizes they are not alone in facing a difficult decision.

To get started, the patient should make a commitment. The commitment should involve setting goals with a physician about what needs to be done and establishing a timetable of when this can be done. If the patient is reluctant to starting immediately, set a starting time sometime in the future, perhaps a few weeks or a few months and put that date on the calendar: "this is the day I will start to follow the tests and treatments." 

Lastly, having the right doctor to provide the leadership for making the right decision is critical in having success. The right doctor will follow up all recommendations. The right doctor for the patient will understand the fears and reluctance and work with the patient ,and the partner or advocate, to obtain compliance. 

Above all, one should remember the motto of Nike shoes: "Just Do It," and have others to help.

The take-home lesson: in modern medicine we can determine the risk of most serious life threatening illnesses. But after the risk is identified, it takes hard work on the part of the patient and the family and friends to make certain that good advice is followed.

