Sometimes when you have an illness, a condition, a chronic disease, or even a life-threatening problem, you feel like you're in a fight to win against problems that can become overwhelming. It is somewhat like playing poker against a very good card player. Can you ever win? 

Of course you can, and you must realize that you are not playing alone. On your side, advising you how to play and succeed, are your doctors, your nurses, your support group of family and friends, and even, importantly, your insurance company. Each of these people on your team play an important role in helping you to make the best decisions, make the best choices, and above all, not give up. 

First, you must commit yourself to winning. You just can't allow yourself to think that the disease, illness, or condition can get the upper hand. Once you accept that it will, not only will the condition likely produce suffering, but it will decrease your ability to function well, decrease your quality of life, produce psychological reactions like depression and anxiety, and possibly even shorten your life. Never should you "just put up with it." By focusing your energy on succeeding, and allowing all of the players on your team work with you, you can succeed in controlling the condition, reducing suffering, and hopefully curing the illness. 

If this is like playing poker against the disease, what is in your winning hand? You have five cards, each of them very important to overcoming most of what an illness will throw at you. The first card is information. By having information about the illness, the best tests, the standard and cutting-edge treatments, and side effects, you and your team can make the right decisions about what is best for you. You can get this information from your physician, and also from internet sites such as healthnews.com and websites which we at healthnews.com recommended in the columns and news item we publish. You can get these for yourself, but also rely on everyone in your support group, your family and friends, and even disease support groups (for example at your hospital, or groups such as the American Heart Association or American Cancer Society) which can give you important insights into what information is available and how it can impact the right decisions you have to make. 

Your second card is your doctor. It is important to have the best primary care physician and specialist for you (future columns will deal with choosing the right doctors and the right specialists for you). Your doctor should be smart and well-trained. The physician should have good judgement, and be able to instill within you confidence that s/he is on top of the possible medical treatments and is aggressive about finding out the problems underlying the illness and the symptoms from which you are suffering.

The third card is the communication card. Does your doctor and the doctor's nursing staff listen well to what you are trying to tell them? Does the physician communicate well with you, in terms you can understand? When the doctors and the nurses are with you, do they instill hope and compassion and caring for you? You must make certain that this card is one of the most important in your hand, because how well your medical team is able to communicate all of the necessary tests, the diagnostic possibilities, and the choices for medical treatment, will ultimately determine how well you do in this fight against your illness. 

The fourth card in your hand is the responsiveness card. The doctor's medical office, your hospital, and even your insurance company need to respond to all of your questions and requests. Responses should be timely, and when you leave a message for your doctor or his nurses, with regard to a question, they should call back within that day. If you are having problems in communicating with the office, or with the insurance company, or even with the hospital, be certain you let them know. There should be an office manager to whom you can express your dissatisfaction, there are patient complaint offices within insurance companies, and there is always the office of the CEO in a hospital, all of which will usually respond to your complaints and get you answers within a very short period of time. 

The fifth card is insurance that you know how to use! Very often you do not have a choice of insurance, and have to take the insurance that is provided by an employer or by a state or governmental plan. You have to know how to use that insurance company efficiently. You not only have to understand who your complaints can be sent to, but you have to understand what information your doctor and you need to provide to the insurance company to make certain that they respond promptly to requests for authorizations and to request to cover tests, treatments, and medications. 

Just as in poker, you can exchange a card that you are not happy with for a better card. In medicine, this is called getting a second opinion (which I will explain more about in future columns). You can usually even exchange an insurance company that is not working well, for a different insurance company that would be more responsive.

So, today's take home message with this column, is evaluate the cards in your poker hand to see if you are prepared to win against any disease, condition, or illness that you will face. If you are not succeeding in having the best team and the best "cards," talk with your physician, support group, or insurance company to see what can be done to improve the situation. Above all, don't sit with a bad hand when you know that may face very serious injuries or conditions. Always make certain that you are sitting with the winning hand!

