Do you really need a primary physician? Or, do you just go to an urgent care center or emergency room whenever you are feeling ill? 

Everyone needs a good primary care physician, and needs one that is the right physician FOR YOU. The reasons are that only by trying to prevent diseases and screening for the early signs of illness can you be fairly certain that you won't suffer from a chronic illness. Screening tests can ascertain if you are at risk for a disease, that the right treatments are given, and the right lifestyle changes are made. 

Many people have poor health habits (overeating, overdrinking, smoking), and a primary care physician can help you to improve your lifestyle. Family planning can be discussed with the primary care physician, and you can make the right decisions about when to have children, and how to make certain that they turn out to be the healthiest kids! No one can predict when an injury will occur or a sickness will develop. Having a good primary care physician leaves you confident that you and a physician who really cares about you will be able to rapidly take care of any of these problems when they arise. The physician also helps you to decide what is the best hospital for you, how you can work well with your insurance, and how to stay healthy and happy in your life. 

I met a man the other day who was limping. He had a painful foot for four years, but because he did not have health insurance (he claimed it was too expensive), he hadn't seen a physician "in years." No one had ever taken an X-ray or performed blood tests to diagnose the cause, whether it was inflammation, fracture or arthritis. He said he was doing fine just taking aspirin every day. But was he doing the right thing? Even if you don't have insurance, you can see a physician for "cash" and even sometimes negotiate a reduced fee down to the amount that Medicare pays (just ask the physician's office before you go in for an appointment). Every health insurance plan allows you to have a primary care physician, and if a physician is not seeing you or taking care of you adequately, you can get a second opinion or switch primary care doctor to find one who will pay attention to you. 

Well, the man with the sore foot had made the wrong decision about not seeing a physician. Inexpensive X-rays and blood tests could have diagnosed conditions that were easily treatable. The mistake of just taking aspirin for years may have damaged his kidneys, but without blood tests, he wouldn't know when to stop taking aspirin and get the problem taken care of. I spoke with the man's wife who said that the foot pain was slowing him down, and making it difficult for him to get through some days at work. Even she had been unable to make him pay attention to a potentially serious situation that could result in severe long-term disability. 

So when you are well, it's important to find the right doctor for you. What traits are important in a good primary care physician? 

The good primary care doctor will really care about you, and show concern about all of your problems, and even potential problems. The physician will identify any bad habits or traits, and will screen you for important illnesses or risk factors. 

Your primary care physician should be responsive. Either the doctor, or the doctor's nurse practitioner, physician's assistant, nurses, or office staff should return your phone calls, and respond to requests for information and tests. If the office is not responding, be certain to discuss this either with the physician, the nurses, or the office manager. 

Your primary care physician's office is a great source for information about health and disease. Make certain that the physician or his staff are willing to take the time to get you information and refer you to the important internet sites that the physician wants you to use for health and wellness. Continue to read health news, and share with your physician any information that you have that is designed to increase the helpful advice your physician and his staff can give you.

Lastly, your primary care physician takes care of your symptoms. If you have a symptom that has not gotten better, your physician's office should be caring enough for you to see that more tests or more treatments are implemented to ensure all of your symptoms are controlled or cured. If a symptom or sign continues and your primary care physician is not paying attention, it is time for a second opinion, or referral to a specialist, or better discussions between you and your physician. 

So here is a checklist of things your primary care physician should have checked or discussed with you: blood pressure, cholesterol, weight, diet, bad habits and how to break them, vaccinations, screening tests for heart disease and cancer, sleeping pattern, mental health (depression, anxiety, etc.), sexual problems, strength, skin abnormalities, vision, hearing, bowel function, and lab tests of your vital organs. If your doctor has missed any of these, put them down on your list of "must talk about" and take it to your next visit. 

Your primary care physician is the most important person on your healthcare team besides you and your family. That doctor is the focus point around which decisions for preventive care, screening tests, improvement in health habits, diagnostic tests, selection of treatments, and referral to specialists all depend. Get the right doctor FOR YOU, and you will always be confident in your healthcare.

