Maintaining your health depends upon getting the most from your visits with your physician. A troubling article in The New York Times by Dr. Valerie Ulene suggests that many patients are being overtreated by well-meaning physicians. Although she gives some examples, such as when the doctor prescribes antibiotics to children with infections, recommends diagnostic X-rays or CT scans which produce some radiation exposure, or even suggests genetic testing for disease, Dr. Ulene doesn't tell you that actually, many children with viral colds also have dangerous bacterial infections in their throats, sinuses, and ears that need antibiotics to avoid complications. In addition, many patients with mild symptoms have potentially fatal early cancers or coronary heart blockages that can have a high chance of cure and recovery only if they have prompt CT scans or X-rays. And testing blood to detect gene mutations that cause cancer is the only way to find out if you need medicines or treatments that can PREVENT life-threatening tumors, rather than trying to eradicate them once they have attacked your vital organs.

But Dr. Ulene has given you a valuable challenge: You should always consider carefully the benefits and the risks of tests or treatments that your doctor has recommended.

When you visit with your physician, how do you know if you are being undertreated or overtreated? The answer to this will determine whether you are getting excellent health care, or whether you are being inadequately treated for illnesses or inappropriately failing to screen for important diseases. 

My first recommendation you should follow is to trust your judgement. Just as you use your feelings to determine if you are being told everything about an automobile, house, insurance, or an appliance which you are planning to purchase, so too should you trust your judgement when the physician is recommending treatments or tests for you, or planning tests to screen you for important diseases.

It is important to understand that physicians should be following National Treatment Guidelines in treating any illness you have. National Practice Guidelines also apply to screening for important diseases such as heart disease, obesity, diabetes, and cancer. Therefore, the recommendation for your office visit is to ask your physician the following questions, "Are you treating my symptoms according to the National Guidelines?" Or, "Are you following the National Recommendations for screening me for the important diseases which I might develop, like high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, and cancer?"

How your physician answers those questions will determine whether you can trust the treatment plan that has been suggested. If the doctor says that there are no guidelines for him to follow, it is logical for you to check on the internet, or to even seek out a second opinion, either with another primary care physician or with a specialist. On the internet you can search for "National Guidelines for disease XXX" or "National Guidelines for screening for XXX," "National Guidelines for vaccinations". Often the recommendations come from the American Academy of Family Practice (AAFP), Center for Disease Control (CDC), or National Institutes of Health (NIH). 

I also suggest asking why the physician has recommended an X-ray, CT scan, or other medical tests for you and to listen carefully to how the physician answers. If his explanations make logical sense, it is very likely that your tests and treatments are needed. If his answer sounds implausible, ask further questions like, "Are you absolutely certain?" or "Is this testing based upon National Standards?" 

Having another person with you will help you to determine how reasonable the advice is that your physician provides. This person can be a relative or a friend. These people, called "patient advocates," can be very helpful in helping to take notes and to interpret what the physician has told you. The advice of the patient advocate can also guide you in a decision as to whether you need a second opinion. 

Unfortunately, undertreatment is more common than overtreatment. If you do not tell your physician about every symptom that you have, it is likely that the first signs of possibly serious illness may go undetected, and this could result in very serious complications of those diseases. For example, untreated high blood pressure may begin to damage your heart, untreated diabetes may begin to damage your vision and your kidneys, untreated early obesity may begin to result in diabetes and heart disease, and untreated cancer may result in diagnosing a tumor when it is already widespread, or beyond highly curable Stage I cancer. 

For the take-home lesson for this column, I strongly suggest that you maintain a very close relationship with your physicians so that you are comfortable always asking the questions mentioned above. Taking notes, listening well, and having another person with you when you are at your doctor's office will all help to avoid both over treatment and under treatment.

