We all wish to live longer, and this hope is being met by scientific advances in medicine. Average length of life is increasing into the mid-80s in the United States, and this increase length of life brings with it potential problems: How will we feel during our later years? 

By the year 2050, one-quarter of the world’s population will be over 60 and these individuals will be developing chronic illnesses that will require care. A common worry is that a longer life may not be a healthy life. Cardiovascular, orthopedic, and mental illnesses may result in reductions in quality of life at older ages because of the onset of frailty.
 
According to Dr. J. Michel of the University of Geneva, Switzerland, and his co-authors (Journal of the American Medical Association, February 13, 2008) who have examined the nature of life at older ages, frailty is defined as having at least two of the following characteristics loss of muscle mass, weight loss, under nutrition, poor balance, slow gait, and/or bone loss (osteoporosis or osteopenia). Frailty exists and is often accompanied by chronic illnesses such as cardiovascular disease, arthritis, cognitive disorders or dementia, gastrointestinal disorders, neuropathy, and/or pulmonary disease. 

In the United States, other authors have pointed out that people 80 years of age or older have at least a 75 percent chance of dying with a significant disability. The challenges of taking care of this increasing number of patients is potentially overwhelming the medical care system despite the increased training of geriatricians and gerontologists. Even the people who are among the younger aged people (between 65 and 85 years of age) disability is often common, and often disease related. 

However, frailty is usually a result of chronic conditions which are capable of being treated. The issues of maintaining normal weight, blood pressure, blood glucose level, and blood cholesterol levels as well as having adequate physical exercise should be of paramount importance in everyone’s visit with their primary doctor, because achieving these goals can extend health into older age and prevent frailty. These interventions should not begin at elderly ages, over 65, but must begin in early adulthood and patterns of healthy living should be established even during childhood. Setting the norm for good lifestyle with adequate nutrition, good physical activity, smoking avoidance, and only moderate or less drinking of alcohol must begin early in life in order to protect the quality of life during later years. 

These findings have important messages for us today. Both in our own lives, and in the lives of our family and children, it is important to set standards for a healthy lifestyle. If you are a parent or grandparent, you must be the model for your children and grandchildren. This not only includes having a healthy weight or continuing to take steps to get your weight into normal range, but teaching your family to monitor their weight and know their weight goal: a normal body mass index under 30.

In addition, being healthy and being a good role model means having a normal blood pressure, fasting blood glucose, and fasting blood cholesterol. Not only must your numbers be normal, but you must teach your family what normal numbers are (blood pressure under 140 systolic and under 90 diastolic; fasting blood glucose under 100; and fasting cholesterol under 200), how to get the numbers at your doctor’s visit, how to record them in your home medical record, and having a home scale and blood pressure cuff and using them to monitor weight and pressure regularly. 

To prevent frailty you next have to concentrate on your doctor’s visits. You must make it a point to have the important conversations about disease prevention with physicians. To facilitate this, make a list of questions for your physician (or for your children’s pediatrician) about healthy lifestyle including vaccinations, diet, healthy lifestyles, and cardiovascular and other disease management such as blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood glucose. Be certain to ask if you need a screening test such as carotid ultrasound to detect potential blood clots that could lead to stroke. If you have a strong family history of heart disease, or vascular disease such as stroke, make sure your doctor has checked out all the possible causes so you PREVENT these illnesses before they create a catastrophic event that could make you frail. 

To make sure you and your family have a healthy and happy old age, you should make health a topic for family discussion, and even discussion with friends so that healthy lifestyle becomes a characteristic of yourself and your social group. Your interactions with your physician should include screening and prevention so that those illnesses that produce frailty can be avoided. Since nutrition, cardiovascular health, neurological health, and bone health are so important to improve quality of life, it is important for your physician to play an important role in reducing your risk of frailty as you grow older. Since so many elderly individuals have good quality of life, you do not want to be the one whose quality of life, and length of live have been limited by preventable chronic illness. 
