Everyone fears developing chronic diseases, but most people fear cancer more than any other illness, even AIDS, heart attack, stroke, or Alzheimer's disease. Since cancer strikes one out of every two men and one out of every three women, most people pay close attention to cancer news items, and discuss cancer with their doctor. But we all are afraid that the physician will find a suspicious lump or spot during our next appointment.

We all want to read in the morning paper that the new "breakthrough" has occurred and now we are able to cure cancer. Indeed, we see many breakthroughs occurring in all human diseases, from heart disease to bone disease to kidney disease and, yes, even to cancer. If a magic pill were to be discovered that increased the cure rate from 20 percent to 90 percent, we would all consider this a major breakthrough. Well, that breakthrough is here now: it's called "Early Diagnosis of Cancer in Stage 1."

Why do I stress early diagnosis can be a breakthrough in cancer care? Because today, doctors have many screening tests available that make it likely that if you ever develop cancer, it will be found in Stage 1. 

One thing we must remember above all else: If cancer is diagnosed early, it is one of the most curable of all diseases. This is because cancers found in Stage 1 (just a localized tumor that has not invaded into the lymph nodes or spread to other organs) is usually very curable, almost always over 90%. If a symptom, even a mild one, is disregarded by the patient, or if a screening test is not ordered by the doctor or taken by the patient, or if the doctor does not do a complete exam and misses a tell-tale sign, then cancer is often diagnosed in later stages, 2, 3, or even 4. In these stages, cures are much less likely to occur and more therapy is necessary (more extensive surgery, added radiation, or stronger chemotherapy). 

What are some examples of better cure rates in Stage 1 compared to other stages? In breast cancer, the earliest cancer is Stage 0 (the cancer has not even invaded into the breast tissue itself). The five-year cure rate is 100%. In Stage 1, the five-year cure rate is 98%. If one delays and finds cancer has spread extensively in the breast or to lymph nodes (Stages 2 and 3) then the cure rate reduces to 84%. And when the tumor has spread to other organs, Stage 4, the cure rate is only 27% at five years. 

Similar results occur in lung cancer. If a person is diagnosed in Stage 1, the cure rate is as good as breast cancer (95 percent), but in Stages 2 and 3 the cure rate is only 15 percent. Only 3 percent are cured at five years after diagnosis of Stage 4 disease. 

Colon cancer, the same story! If a cancer is diagnosed very early in Stage 1 by colonoscopy, then the cure rate is 90 percent. However, if it has progressed to Stage 2 or 3, cure is only 70 percent, and with Stage 4, only 10 percent. 

In ovarian cancer, Stage 1 can be cured in 92 percent, but with Stages 2 or 3, only 71 percent are cured at five years. And in Stage 4, women at five years are cured only 29 percent of the time.

In fact, a new organization has been formed to educate people throughout the country on how important it is to be diagnosed in Stage 1. This organization is called Cancer Schmancer (named after the title of Fran Drescher's book about her experiences with cancer). It was started by Fran after the diagnosis of her uterine cancer was delayed because of tests not being performed. To make certain that the same thing does not happen to others she has formed a national not-for-profit organization whose motto is "Stage 1 is the cure." If you want more information, contact www.cancerschmancer.org. 

So now that you know that cancer can be diagnosed early and your cure can depend on whether you have received the screening tests and paid attention to any early symptom, what should you do? First, look at your family history and your lifestyle and habits. Second, go to your doctor and say, "I really want to make certain that you have done all of the screening tests to make certain that if I get cancer, it will be in Stage 1." Be sure to tell your doctor if anyone in your family has had breast, ovarian, colon, or prostate cancer. Be honest with your doctor about how much (if any) you smoke or drink, or if you are exposed to secondhand smoke at work or home. 

Third, if you have ANY symptom, call your doctor. Insist that all tests be made to be sure the symptom is not an early warning signal of curable cancer. If your symptom persists after treatment, get another checkup or if necessary, get a second opinion (a later column will tell you how to do this easily).

After you have talked about these things with the doctor, your doctor should tell you exactly what screening tests have to be performed regularly every year, and what kinds of lifestyle changes you should make. If your primary care doctor cannot answer this, ask to be referred to an internist, lung doctor, gynecologist, or oncologist who can make certain that you have the right screening schedule to save your life. 

For more information on stages of cancer, cure rates, and screening tests, you can go to the American Cancer Society website at www.cancer.org. Future columns will talk about screening for individual cancers, and prevention of each kind of cancer.

