The most important part of staying healthy is getting the best advice from your physician and following it. This starts with your office visit. Hopefully, you have chosen a good physician who is interested, intelligent, communicates well, and follows up with you. 

All too often, a patient sees a physician for 5 minutes or less for a "check-up" or a new symptom, gets only a brief examination and a short set of instructions. How can you be certain you are not only getting your money's worth from your visit, but you are getting the very best information and the very best recommendations? 

Getting the very best results from your doctor visit centers around your ability to make certain that all the right steps are taken before, during, and after the time that you are in the office. This starts by making certain that you have all of your office forms completed at the time that you go to the physician's office, and that all of your past history and family history are completely communicated to the physician through the office staff. If there are forms that you need to fill out, get them before you go to the office and fill them out ahead of time when you are not rushed. 

When you are going to the office, arrive slightly early and complete any additional forms, making certain that the physician has a list of all your medications, allergies, history of any illnesses in your family, and history of your past treatments. Giving the physician copies from your home medical record helps to get the very best evaluation during your office visit. 

Then, make certain that you have a complete list of all of your symptoms and concerns. When you arrive, be certain that the clerk puts a copy of all of these questions on the front of your chart so that the nurse and physician (or nurse practitioner or physician's assistant) has them during the time of your face-to-face visit. 

Make certain that your "Review of Systems" is completely and accurately described. What is a "review of systems"? The office should have a list of questions about each of the different organ and systems in your body, for example your skin, throat, lungs, heart, stomach, intestines, urine, muscles, and nervous system. This review should also cover your mental well being or problems such as depression, stress or anxiety, as well as sexuality, memory, weight, and bad health habits such as smoking, drinking, or drug misuse. The questions about symptoms related to these organs should be very carefully answered by you, leaving no minor symptom undisclosed. 

When the physician or his staff comes in for examination, be certain that you are completely disrobed so that the physician can evaluate all of your organs and not through a shirt or skirt, or trousers, or thick underwear. A full examination is possible, but not when a lot of clothing interferes, possibly hiding an early sign of something abnormal.

Your physician should give you a clear and understandable description of what is wrong with you, for each of the symptoms you have and for each of the abnormal findings on your examination. You should be given the results of your sugar test, cholesterol, blood pressure, pulse, and any other important laboratory data or x-ray which is not normal. The description of what is wrong is very important so that you can not only ask the doctor questions about abnormalities, but also research them on your own on the internet or with family and friends. 

The doctor should then give you a treatment plan that is composed of these elements:

What are the illnesses that the doctor thinks you have? What's the doctor's diagnosis? 
What are the tests and treatments for it, the benefits, the side effects, and any rehabilitation that is required to help you get better? 
What is going to be done to control your symptoms? Even though you may be treated for an infection in your lungs, what else can be done to control your cough, fever, fatigue, and poor appetite, for example. Each and every symptom about which you are concerned should be discussed, even including your weight, your diet, and even mental symptoms or sexual symptoms. 
What is going to be done to screen you for any early signs of serious chronic illnesses? Based on your age and sex, what screening tests are required and what intervals? Are you up to date on these? Are any needed at the present time? Are there any that you have to discuss before agreeing to? 
What needs to be done to prevent future serious conditions, a discussion of steps to prevent further illnesses. Even though you may be totally healthy or have no symptoms or signs of any illness with regard to, for example heart and lungs and colon, what steps should you be taking to prevent further illnesses in these areas? What should be your optimal diet, your optimal weight, and the optimal vitamins and nutrients to prevent any serious or chronic conditions? 
Where can you get additional information on your treatments? Does the doctor have favorite internet websites, or recommended written information about treatments or tests? Who else can the doctor suggest to whom you might talk to for additional information? 
As you can see, by taking a few simple steps, you can get a much more thorough examination, evaluation, and recommendation for treatments. If you have gone through all of these steps, you can indeed get all your money's worth out of the physician visit that you've been so diligent to schedule and keep.

