Recently, the adverse side effects of medications have become more widely publicized. In articles in newpapers, arthritis drug Vioxx reportedly increased the risk of heart disease. Chantix, given to stop smoking, reportedly increased suicidal thoughts. Cold medicines may have caused or contributed to deaths in children under six years of age. Bishposphonates such as Fosamax were associated with large cysts in the jaw, known as osteonecrosis. And even Prempro was reported to increase the risk of breast cancer.
 
Do you know the possible side effects of the medications you are taking? Have you asked your physician about whether these side effects are likely to occur in you, or not? Have you been able to make a logical decision based upon the side effects of medications?

It is commonly held belief by drug companies and many doctors that patients will be too frightened of medications if they know about all of the side effects. Indeed, many patients do not want to take medications once they see the list of all of the “possible” side effects that can occur. Possible side effects do not really give any patient a complete picture of how frequently these side effects occur. Just because a medicine may be associated with a bad result in 1 patient out of 1,000 does not mean that everyone will refuse to take it, and does not mean that it is a “dangerous” treatment. But it is only logical and ethical that any patient who is considering taking that medicine should know about the rare possibility of that side effect.

The result of this fear that many patients might not take medicines is that many physicians fail to fully explain all of the side effects to patients. Every patient is entitled to know the possible side effects, but is also entitled not to be frightened of the information. 

According to an article in The Wall Street Journal (Drug-Safety Data: Too Much Information? December 9, 2008), a study by the pharmaceutical company Pfizer found that among 300 medical professionals, 89 percent were somewhat concerned that patients might stop their medications if potentially negative safety information was released to the public “too early.” This implies that you may not be receiving all of the information from your physician and the staff regarding side effects of your medications, medicines you may already be taking. 

What should be done about this? First, you should be entitled to all information about the side effects that have been seen with the medication you are taking, regardless of whether those side effects were observed during the studies that resulted in the development of the drug (pre-marketing prospective clinical trials), or the studies that have been reported to the Food and Drug Administration since the approval of the drug (post-marketing observational trials). Studies done before FDA approval of a drug sometimes don’t give the complete side effect picture since only healthy patients might have been studied, while after approval, the drug might be used in patients with more diseases on many different types of medicines and /or nutrients. 

Side effect information can be obtained through the Food and Drug Administration website at www.FDA.gov. This can also be found in the website of the pharmaceutical company that manufactures the drug that you are taking or are about to take. Very often your doctor’s office has given you a list of side effects of the medications, and your pharmacist can provide you with a complete list of side effects. Even an internet pharmacy can provide you with this data! Don’t leave the office or pharmacy without the list.

But rather than be frightened of all of the possible side effects, your next step should be to read the list, develop a set of questions for your physician, and return to your physician’s office to ask your doctor about the frequency of these side effects and whether or not you are likely to have them. Also ask if the medicine is likely to interact with any other drugs you may be taking. You should then make a decision about whether or not you wish to continue taking (or start to take) a medication that can have potential side effects. You should know from your physician what is going to be done to make certain that any potential side effects can be picked up as soon as possible.

Finally, regardless of what medications you are on, always come to the doctor’s office with a complete list of all symptoms that you have since any of them may be a side effect of some medicine. Also get a copy from the doctor of all of your laboratory tests and circle any tests which are abnormal, or tests that you have a question about. You should know what your tests show, why they show it, and whether your medication list is the best possible one for you!
