Of all human diseases, cancer is the most feared. One out of every three women, and one out of two men will get cancer during their lifetime, and among women, the most common cancer is breast cancer. In fact, one out of every eight women born in the United States will have breast cancer at some point in her life.

The good news is that you can prevent breast cancer. Breast cancer prevention involves some simple methods, and some that are more involved. The simple methods for preventing breast cancer are ones that every woman can easily use. Exercise is one factor known to prevent breast cancer, and women should consider 30 to 180 minutes of sweat-producing exercise every week. This has an effect on the ovaries that reduces the likelihood of breast cancer. Maintaining a healthy diet is also very important, and this includes reducing fat, substituting red meat with fish or poultry, eating at least five helpings of fruits, vegetables or fruit juices each day, and controlling how many calories you eat so you can maintain a normal weight. In addition, women are at lower risk of breast cancer if they have had children before the age of 30. Excessive alcohol raises breast cancer risk, so women should limit their intake of alcohol to 1 drink per day. Studies have also proven that postmenopausal estrogen-replacement therapy with a combination of estrogen and progesterone raises breast cancer risk. So if you are on those drugs, be sure to discuss breast cancer risks with your physician, and consider alternate medicines to control menopausal symptoms. Although information is not certain, many physicians feel that smoking slightly increases chances of getting breast cancer, so make every effort to avoid cigarette smoke. Your doctor can help you stop smoking (a future column will explain more).

There are also prescription medications that prevent breast cancer. In large studies of tens of thousands of women, two medications have shown remarkable protection against breast cancer. Just one pill daily of tamoxifen reduces breast cancer risk by about 50% in women with an elevated risk of breast cancer. In a more recent study, raloxifine, which has been used to treat women with weak bones (osteoporosis), has also been shown to reduce breast cancer risk by 50%. This is also taken as one pill daily. 

Fortunately, tamoxifen and raloxifine each have slightly different side effects. While tamoxifen has an increased frequency of hot flashes, as well as a slightly increased risk of tumors of the uterus and blood clots, raloxifine has fewer of those side effects, but does have some changes in vaginal symptoms in a few women. This means that your physician can help to guide you to an appropriate medication to prevent breast cancer, and avoid the side effects of either tamoxifen or raloxifine. Other medicines are currently being tested, but the results will not be available for several years. 

In addition, women at very high risk of breast cancer because of a strong family history of breast cancer, or a positive blood test for mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes, can not only reduce their risk for breast cancer by taking tamoxifen and raloxifine, but can also prevent breast cancer through preventive surgery. Removing the ovaries (after the desire for childbearing has passed) can reduce the risk of breast cancer by 50% in high-risk women. In women whose risk of breast cancer is extremely high (often over half of the women in these families develop breast cancer), some of these women have decided to have a prophylactic preventive removal of the breast tissue with immediate reconstructive breast surgery. This surgery lowers the frequency of breast cancer by 90%. 

But right now, you should know if your breast cancer risk is small or elevated. You can determine your risk of breast cancer by going to the National Institutes of Health website.

In later columns, we will talk about breast cancer screening and also prevention of other types of cancers. If you are fearful of having breast cancer, be certain to take this news to your physician to discuss what types of interventions are going to best protect you from breast cancer in the future
