Recently, a new technology has become available in cancer centers. This is a test called “circulating cancer cells.” One commercial firm, Quest Diagnostics, offers this as the CellSearch test. In this test, a tube of blood is drawn, put through a machine called a flow cytometer, and cells that show cancer-related proteins are detected and counted to determine if there are cancerous, pre-cancerous, or cancer-like cells in a person’s body. 

This test has not been shown to be able to detect cancer earlier than standard treatments. Therefore, you should discuss with your doctor the standard screening tests necessary to detect the common cancers: breast cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, colon cancer, ovarian cancer (and any other cancers that may have occurred in your family). Your primary care physician should be able to give you a list of what tests you need to have done, but a blood test for circulating cancer cells is NOT one of them. 

So what can this new test do? Why should everyone be concerned about it? 

The reason this may be important in cancer care is because cancer is so frequent in the United States. One of every two men will have cancer, and one of every three women will have cancer. So asking about circulating cancer cell tests, for yourself if you have cancer, or for a family member with cancer, is important because it can be used to monitor how well you are doing, and because many cancer doctors are not yet using this test to help to guide treatment. 

Initially, it was found that women with advanced breast cancer who were receiving chemotherapy had better responses if their circulating cancer cell counts were falling, compared to patients who were not having a falling number of circulating caner cells. This means that the test can help to reduce the time a person spends receiving inactive, unsuccessful, and very expensive types of treatments that may be producing lots of side effects but no benefit. Using this test appropriately can save money, and save side effects, while increasing the probability of good control and even possible cure. 

Those studies have now been extended to include prostate cancer and lung cancer. So patients with those diseases can talk with their doctors to see if the test can help guide their treatments.

An additional study has shown that circulating tumor cell numbers can also determine which patients might develop recurrent breast cancer after their surgery, and which patients will continue to remain cured of their breast cancer. Dr. K. Pachmann of the Friderich Schiller University in Bayreuth, Germany and her colleagues (Journal of Clinical Oncology, Volume 26, Page 1208, 2008) studied patients after their breast cancer surgery, before they had and additional hormonal, chemotherapy, and/or biotherapy treatments. Patients whose circulating cancer cells numbers fell after treatments had a very low chance of recurrent cancer (approximately 4%). Patients whose circulating cancer numbers stayed high or rose after treatment had much higher recurrence rates, 18% to 45%.. \

This means that physicians now can personalize cancer care plans for breast cancer patients. Those cancer patients whose circulating cancer cell numbers rise can continue different treatments to increase the cure rate, and reduce the risk of relapse. And patients whose circulating cancer cell numbers are low after treatments can stop therapy, and feel more confident they are cured. This test can make a large difference in how every breast cancer patient is treated, raising the cure rate, and lengthening life. 

The take-home message from this is that if you or someone you know has cancer, no matter what kind, they should ask their physician about a circulating tumor cell test. If you have never had cancer, you should continue to ask your primary care physician about the most appropriate and comprehensive tests for screening for cancer. 
