A mitten worn by patients could save lives by speeding up the diagnosis of heart attacks. 

The new invention, which resembles an oven glove, is put on the patient's left hand for them to hold against their chest. 
Tiny sensors in the material pick up electrical activity in the heart and feed the results back to a portable monitor. 
 
This allows paramedics called out to someone who has collapsed with chest pain to immediately see if they have suffered a heart attack and need to be taken to hospital.
Called PhysioGlove, the new device is a quicker and more convenient way of performing a vital heart test called an electrocardiogram or ECG. 
Every year, around 270,000 people in Britain suffer a heart attack, and coronary disease remains Britain's biggest killer. 
For many years, ECGs have been one of the main ways that doctors check for heart disease. 
The test, which involves attaching up to ten electrodes to the patient's chest, is used for both routine testing and in emergency situations. 
For example, a patient who is at risk of heart disease because they are overweight, smoke or have a family history of the disease, may be referred by their GP for an exercise ECG. 
 
This means they are wired up to an ECG machine while walking on a treadmill. The electrodes measure the electrical activity of the heart under stress to look for signs of damage. 
But ECGs are also frequently used in 999 call-outs when a patient has a suspected heart attack. 
The problem is medical staff need to be highly trained to ensure all ten electrodes are placed in exactly the right position on the body. 
If one of the wires is a few millimetres out of place, it can give a false reading, meaning a heart attack could be missed altogether. 
Hairy skin also has to be shaved before the electrode 'pads' can be attached. 
Even then, they can come unstuck. 
Worse still, the cables often become tangled or broken - eating into the little time ambulance staff have to perform life-saving checks. 
The PhysioGlove, developed by an American company called Commwell Inc, based in Illinois, could trim vital seconds off the process. 
The manufacturer claims it can perform a full ECG in less than a minute, roughly a tenth of the time it can take for a conventional test. 
Already approved for use in the UK and Europe, the glove looks like a standard oven glove, but it has electrodes fixed into the material in such a way that when the hand is placed over the chest, it picks up electrical activity in the right area. 
The patient first lies flat, then places their left hand and arm across their chest, keeping the elbow tucked into their body in what Commwell Inc describes as a 'pledge of allegiance' style. 
By pressing down on the skin, the patient ensures there is good contact with the electrodes. 

The signals are then fed to a monitor connected to the glove, which gives an instant reading on the heart's electrical activity. 
A spokesman for Commwell Inc said: 'The glove is in alignment with the correct anatomical positions needed to measure electrical activity. It can be performed by almost anybody. There is no need for special training.' 
Ellen Mason, cardiac nurse with the British Heart Foundation, said if the glove works as claimed, it could improve the ECG process. 

'It could speed it up and that would be good news, especially if someone has had a heart attack,' she added. 'At the moment, it takes a while to place all the wires on the chest, and they can get broken and twisted.' 
But she warned that it's not clear how the glove, which is a standard size, will work on patients who differ considerably in build. 
'The placement of the electrodes is absolutely crucial to getting the ECG right. I would be really surprised if it worked on a man with a 46in chest and a woman with a 32in chest.' 
