Thought the long, cold winter was behind us? In fact many people - but particularly men - will only now be reaping the consequences of those endless weeks indoors. 
That’s because all the rich food, alcohol and salty snacks we consume during the winter months puts extra pressure on our kidneys, leading to kidney stones. These in turn can cause painful urinary infections, crippling backache, and in some cases, kidney failure. 
Around 12 per cent of men and 4 per cent of women in the UK suffer from kidney stones, and the number is rising. While adults of all ages and children are affected, the biggest leap is in those aged 32 and over, with numbers doubling in the past four years alone. 
‘Our modern lifestyles are responsible, particularly because we don’t drink enough water and eat the wrong foods,’ explains Daron Smith, a consultant urologist at University College Hospital, London. 
With kidney stones sometimes taking just months to form, spring can be a prime time for them to appear. Kidney stones are usually caused when the levels of chemicals in the urine - usually a salt called calcium oxalate, but also calcium phosphate and uric acid - become too high leading to a build-up of crystals. If lots of these crystals form, they fuse together and form a stone. 
A poor diet and dehydration are major risk factors (Saudi Arabia has one of the highest kidney stone rates in the world). 

You’re also at greater risk if you are obese or inactive, have had kidney or urinary infections in the past, have Crohn’s disease (inflammation of the gut), or have had a kidney stone previously (around 60 per cent of people who have a kidney stone will develop another within seven years, although it’s not clear why). 
Surprisingly, even trying to be healthy can cause the problem - taking calcium and vitamin D supplements may increase the risk of developing a kidney stone because more calcium is excreted through the urine.



Small kidney stones tend to pass painlessly through the body in the urine and may even go undetected. Problems occur when a stone blocks the normal drainage of urine, usually in the ureter, which transports urine from the kidneys to the bladder. 
Because this is a narrow tube, any obstruction is incredibly painful and can cause an infection because urine cannot drain. If a stone is found to be stuck in the ureter, urgent treatment is needed as it can stop the kidney functioning altogether. 
Symptoms of kidney stones include agonising abdominal pain, nausea, fever, pain when going to the toilet, and cloudy, even bloody, urine. ‘Bizarrely, the pain often starts at night or the early hours of the morning although we don’t know why,’ adds Mr Smith. 
Some sufferers develop a vicious pain in the back. And because the symptoms are so acute and frightening, many end up in A&E.
 
Smaller stones will eventually pass through the urine - although the patient needs to drink plenty of water. If the stones are too large or painful to be passed - or there is already blood and tissue damage – the usual treatment is with extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL). 
Soundwaves (similar to ultrasound, although at a much greater intensity) are used to shatter the stones into tiny pieces that are easier for the body to eliminate in the urine. The technology is used in 80 per cent of cases and is most effective on stones of between 4mm and 2cm. But it often needs to be repeated. 
Furthermore, ESWL isn’t always powerful enough to tackle larger stones which means that until now surgery has been the only other option — either by inserting a flexible tube into the urethra to remove the stone or break it up with lasers, or operating on the kidney through an incision in the patient’s back to remove the stone or laser it. 
However, caretaker James Robertson, 37, from London, was one of the first to benefit from a new type of laser. His problems developed after what started out as a dull ache in his lower back one Saturday evening swiftly became a crippling pain. 
By the following morning he was on the floor, rolling around in agony; an emergency doctor prescribed painkillers, but by the Monday the pain was so excruciating his GP sent him immediately to hospital, where a kidney stone was diagnosed. 
‘I was astonished,’ he recalls. ‘I’d thought only older people developed kidney stones.’ 
The intention was to remove the stone with ESWL but this didn’t work for James. The stone was then successfully lasered using the Odyssey 30 Holmium Laser System, which has enough power to treat any kidney stone, regardless of size. 
The treatment was quick and the stone was broken up easily. In fact, James was back home within two days and at work the following week. Although slightly overweight there seemed no obvious reason for him to have developed the stone in the first place. 
‘He was just unlucky,’ says Mr Smith, who treated him. But because having a kidney stone puts you at higher risk of developing another, James has now been advised to drink more water and lose a little weight by doing more exercise and eating a healthier diet. 
Meanwhile, the patient himself is simply relieved the pain has gone. ‘Someone said that having a kidney stone is as painful as childbirth - if that’s the case I’m very glad I’m not a woman.’ 
