Last week, the Prime Minister's wife Sarah Brown launched the Mail's annual Inspirational Women of the Year awards to honour the work so many extraordinary women do to improve the lives of others. 
To nominate an Inspirational Woman you know, simply complete the coupon below and tell us why you think your candidate deserves to win  -  whether it's a brilliant school teacher, a campaigner who makes a real difference to the community or a mother who cares selflessly for a disabled child.
Today, DIANA APPLEYARD meets a woman who founded a charity which has raised almost £50m for cancer research. 

 
Twelve years ago, Nina Barough woke from a dream that was decidedly unusual. She had dreamt she was taking part in the New York Marathon with a group of her close friends  -  and that they had all decided to wear their bras on the outside of their T-shirts. 

Nina had been planning a weekend trip to New York, but she had no plans to complete a marathon. And the bras? She had to admit that was bizarre. 

But weird as it seemed, it struck Nina that her dream would actually be a good way to raise money for breast cancer research, even though at the time she didn't know anyone who had suffered the illness. 

'I remember waking up smiling,' says Nina, now aged 53. 'It was such a fun, outrageous idea that I had to tell my friends. I thought everyone would be up for it, and in the end 13 of us went.' 

A year later, Nina herself was diagnosed with breast cancer  -  and as she battled the disease, she decided that her idea should blossom into a full-blown charity. 

Begun in 1998, her Walk The Walk charity has now raised £48 million for Breakthrough Breast Cancer research and treatment  -  £9.5 million last year alone  -  with more than 200,000 women participating in night-time sponsored powerwalking marathons all over Britain, all wearing outlandish bras over their T-shirts. 

The charity has flourished and is supported by Prince Charles, who is now Patron. 

Nina recalls: 'The first I knew Prince Charles had even heard of us was when his office rang inviting me and my team to Highgrove. Of course, I couldn't resist turning up in an outrageous metal conical bra designed by the TV garden expert Diarmuid Garvin and Laurence Llewellyn-Bowen. 

'I went to hug him and he laughed: "Not in that bra!"' 
Today, such is the success of Nina's work that she often rubs shoulders with the great and the good, was made a CBE in December 2006, and even had a new pathology laboratory at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London named after her. 

Celebrities clamour to be associated with her charity. Stella and Paul McCartney have given support, and every year the number of walks increases. 

his year, there are four moon and daytime sunwalks taking place up and down the UK, and one following the Inca Trail in Peru, as well as women taking part in the London and New York marathons for the charity. 

The charity's huge success is down to Nina's enthusiasm and drive. Not that things have been easy, though. 

The time of the dream that triggered the whole process, Nina had just come out of a 20-year relationship and was living in a rented flat on her own. 

Unmarried and childless at the age of 42, she threw herself into her work running a freelance fashion styling and events business. She was vaguely looking for a new challenge but had not been involved with charities before. 

'I'd been flirting with the idea of flying to New York with friends,' she says, 'but the idea of completing a marathon for charity was totally triggered by the dream of us in our bras.' 

Her friends reacted enthusiastically and agreed to powerwalk the New York Marathon in their bras. With her job in the fashion business, Nina was able to enlist the help of designers and celebs. 

'The whole idea just mushroomed. Paul Smith and Mary Quant designed us some stunning bras, and the Spice Girls helped us, too, by giving interviews pledging their support.' 

It enabled Nina and her 12 friends to raise £25,000 for Breakthrough Breast Cancer Care. 

Nina says: 'We got home from New York thinking it had been a great laugh. To me, it had just been a one-off, but because of the media attention I did begin receiving calls asking if I was going to organise another walk.' 

She didn't pursue it until a year later, in 1997, after discovering a pea-sized lump in her own breast. 

'I was completely fit and healthy  -  I ate healthily, didn't smoke, hardly drank and exercised daily,' she says. 

'None of the women in my family had had breast cancer and it was the last thing I imagined ever happening to me. Of course, the irony wasn't lost on me that we'd just raised all that money for breast cancer.' 

The fashion shoot was on a ranch in Arizona 'in the back of beyond', and the next day Nina set off through the desert to the nearest town to find a doctor who could examine her. 

'If I hadn't taken part in the marathon, I wouldn't have batted an eyelid  -  but because I had more awareness, I knew I had to get it checked out,' she recalls. 

'I was fairly sure the doctor would say "Oh no, it's nothing," but she referred me for a mammogram. An ultrasound test followed, and then a biopsy. 

'The moment the word " cancer" was mentioned, I thought my life would never be the same again. I was terrified.' 

Flying back to England, she saw her own doctor who confirmed this was an aggressive tumour. Over the next two years, Nina had a mastectomy and breast reconstruction, radiotherapy, injections of Zoladex, and Tamoxifen. 

She delayed surgery to take part in the 1998 London Marathon  -  again in her bra  -  with the blessing of her consultant, who agreed she needed time to prepare herself for the months of treatment ahead. 

'I'd had to give up my business because of my illness, and I was living in a small rented flat, reliant on the financial and emotional support of my friends. Life was really tough,' she says. 

Nina, as well as training for the marathon, she was dealing with inquiries from women who also wanted to get involved with her fundraising idea.'It was obvious we had touched a nerve,' she says. 

'Wearing a visible bra is fun, crazy  -  all the words you do not associate with breast cancer. When word got out that we were planning to walk the London Marathon in our bras, I had 50 women all wanting to take part. 

'But there were only 25 places available  -  so I hit on the idea of organising our own marathon to run the night before the official race. It would go from midnight to 7am, ending in Trafalgar Square where the London marathon would start. Because it would be at night, I decided to call it a moonwalk.' 

So Nina quickly put together a newsletter which was sent to the women who'd already made contact, and a friend wrote an article in a health magazine. 

Nina says: 'I went away for a brief holiday, and when I got home I found I couldn't open my front door. Instead of a handful of replies to the newsletter, I had more than 600 applications. 

'Not only were there enough women to make a moonwalk that year a success, I realised there would be support for future moonwalks. 

'The moonwalks seem to have a life of their own. By the second walk in 1999, we had several hundred entries, and as I looked out over this sea of women  -  young and old, all wearing their bras outside their T-shirts or just bras on their own  -  I felt so moved I wanted to cry. 

'There is such a feeling of hope, of joy and inspiration in the people taking part. Some of the women have breast cancer, others are in recovery, or they are family members of people touched by the illness. 

'Other women  -  and the men who participate too  -  just want to raise money for such a worthy cause. The fact that the moonwalks happen at night give them a magical air. Nearly everyone who takes part says they have never felt such a surge of positive energy.' 

Because of the bra connection, Nina approached Playtex for help. The company said it couldn't give sponsorship, but instead offered Nina a computer and a desk in its head office. 

'Up to that point, I'd had paperwork all over my living room floor,' she says, 'so it was such a relief to have a proper space in which to work.' 

While working in the Playtex office, Nina had another lifechanging moment. She met Guy, then in his early 30s, who worked for the company. He is more than 15 years younger than Nina, but she hates the term 'toyboy'. 

'I say that I was born early, and he was late,' she says. 'It feels as if we have always been together.' He now works with Nina at 'Walk The Walk'  -  the official name of the charity behind the moonwalks. 

The couple, who married fouranda-half-years ago, now live in a village in Berkshire  -  with their 'miracle' daughter, Raphaelle. The couple desperately wanted a child and had some medical help, although Nina declines to say exactly what form of fertility treatment. 

'I really didn't know if it would work, but I was utterly amazed to find I was pregnant at 52.' 

Little Raphaelle, now five months old, is a beautiful girl and Nina cannot take her eyes off her. 'She comes everywhere with me,' she says. 

Looking back, Nina says breast cancer has been the most wonderful thing that has ever happened to her. 

'I know that sounds amazing, but without it, I wouldn't have set up Walk The Walk, met Guy or had Raphaelle,' she says. 

'The charity never stops evolving. We are changing the lives of women, encouraging them to exercise, to get fit, to look at their diet and focus on the walks. 

'Women with breast cancer take part, as well as mothers, daughters, fathers, sons, grandparents. I pinch myself , wondering how all this has happened to me. But it's wonderful.' 
