The NHS is fast losing its compassion towards patients, a health expert warned yesterday. 

The pressure on nurses and other staff means hospitals are too often ‘medical factories’, said Niall Dickson, chief executive of the King’s Fund, an independent think-tank. 

He added: ‘I have very little doubt that we’ve seen a deterioration in the level of compassion that is shown by staff to patients. 

‘It’s to do with staff facing very difficult situations - because patients are sicker and hospital stays are shorter - rather than them all turning into nasty people. 

‘If we can’t get compassion into our healthcare, the system is failing.’ 

He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: ‘The board of every hospital should be looking at this as one of their top priorities - what is it like for someone who’s coming in to be treated and how can we improve that experience?’ 

The call received widespread support. 

Compassion has already been listed as one of six core values in the draft constitution of the NHS and the Government is developing ways of measuring it. 

The constitution pledges that staff ‘find the time to listen and talk when it is needed, make the effort to understand, and get on and do the small things that mean so much - not because we are asked to but because we care’. 

Health minister Phil Hope said the Government has launched a ‘dignity and care’ campaign with 4,500 staff champions headed by dignity ambassador Sir Michael Parkinson. 

Mr Hope said his personal experience of treatment for cancer at an NHS hospital in Kettering had led him to believe that ‘dignity and compassion are not a nice-to-have bonus extra. 

'They have got to be hard-wired into the DNA of the NHS.’ 

The KIng’s Fund is piloting a programme next year in which hospital staff meet to discuss situations where they have experienced difficulties in providing compassionate care. U.S. research had found the sessions beneficial. 

Lizzie McLennan, of Help the Aged, said ‘Treating symptoms isn’t always enough.
Sometimes a bit of thoughtfulness and care is what’s needed to make someone truly feel better. 

‘Health and care providers are assessed on lots of things, but dignity and compassion are shamefully not included
