Too many women doctors working fewer hours than men will ultimately result in a major shortage of GPs, a leading specialist warns today. 

Growing numbers of female graduates threaten to put men in a minority in the profession, with serious consequences for patients, according to Brian McKinstry, senior research fellow at Edinburgh University. 

The unwillingness of women GPs to work unsocial hours played a part in the ending of out-of-hours care by the vast majority of family doctors, he argues. 

But part-time working, maternity leave and plans by many women doctors to retire early will have even more 'negative consequences' in future, writes Dr McKinstry in theBritish Medical Journal.

He claims: 'Too many female graduates are bad for medicine, just as too many male ones have been in the past. The numbers of men and women entering medical school should roughly reflect the numbers in society. 

'The case for this is simply on grounds of equal opportunity. But there are also strong economic and workforce planning reasons.'
But, in a robust defence of women¿s role in medicine, Professor Jane Dacre, vice dean of the faculty of biomedical sciences at University College London, said the lack of women in top jobs remains a blight on the profession. 

Also writing in the BMJ, she calls for more flexible working ¿ which is essential to providing good patient care ¿ to benefit all doctors. 

She adds: 'Medicine needs and wants to attract the best and brightest people, whatever their sex.'
Despite outperforming men in medical exams, women are underrepresented in some specialties and leadership positions. 

Professor Dacre says: 'This lack of career progression is not explained by lack of academic aptitude.
'This is a strong argument for ensuring equality of opportunity in medicine, rather than worrying about having too many women in medicine.'
In 2002-2003, all medical schools had more female students than men ¿ with the proportion exceeding 65 per cent at some. 

In primary care in some parts of the country, the number of women GPs exceeds men and soon male doctors 'will be in a minority', Dr McKinstry claims. 

But child care responsibilities mean women doctors tend to work in 'family friendly' areas such as primary care and psychiatry, which makes these specialties more vulnerable to difficulties caused by part-time working and maternity leave. 

Dr McKinstry says that as older male GPs retire, there is likely to be a major shortfall in primary care doctors that could jeopardise continuity of care for patients. 

He adds that women doctors see fewer patients than men, partly because consultations are longer, and they are more likely to send patients to hospital ¿ increasing pressure on hospital services. 

Professor Dacre said there is evidence that care by women doctors leads to better outcomes for patients. With the NHS soon moving to a 48-hour working week to comply with EU laws there could be a chance to improve working patterns all round, she adds. 

'Rather than focus on the detrimental effect of having too many female graduates, the feminisation of medicine should be welcomed as an opportunity to be creative with workforce planning and to recognise that a more flexible approach is required to deliver good quality patient care at all times of the day and night,' she says.

