THE least savoury sight of the week? For me it was Labour activists taking unseemly pleasure in the silver lining they'd spotted in the storm clouds of financial crisis. 
Their thinking can be summarised as follows: "Yes, our economy is coming apart at the seams, heralding misery for millions. But hey, cheer up! It means Alex Salmond's plans to take Scotland to independence have been kicked in the head!" There are peoADVERTISEMENTple, it seems, who would rather see a diminished Scotland locked into the Union, than a resurgent Scotland tempted by full sovereignty. 

That's not to say the route march to independence hasn't hit boggy ground. Today, Salmond gives his leader's speech at the SNP annual conference in Perth knowing he has much to prove. He has to offer a response to the compelling argument that the new economic landscape we inhabit does the Nationalists no favours at all. It's difficult to argue the case for an independent Scotland that would be forced to ask a foreign power to bail it out of a banking crisis. That sounds more like dependence than independence.

The economic meltdown has left Salmond looking uncharacteristically spooked. On Thursday, in a short speech in Perth, he tried to pin the entire blame for our economic woes on Gordon Brown. This was a "Downing Street downturn", he insisted. Did he expect us to conveniently forget that the whole world, from Tallahassee to Tokyo, is experiencing the same downturn? Also failing to hit the mark was Salmond's attack on "Gordon Brown's age of irresponsibility" which, again, was held up as a root cause of our current woes. This simply doesn't chime with what the public believes. Casting Brown as a reckless spendthrift isn't remotely convincing. Whatever else Scots think about the PM – and there is little genuine warmth for him in his homeland – the bizarre characterisation offered to us by Salmond simply doesn't fit.

Unfortunately for the SNP, Salmond is ill-placed to lead the attack where Brown is at his most vulnerable. There are searching questions to be asked about the flawed system of City regulation set up by Brown in his early years as Chancellor. But any attempt by the First Minister to pose these questions will have Labour casting up an interview given to The Times in April last year, in which Salmond said of his plans for independence: "We are pledging a light-touch regulation suitable to a Scottish financial sector with its outstanding reputation for probity, as opposed to one like that in the UK, which absorbs huge amounts of management time in 'gold-plated' regulation." Ouch. 

I don't recall Salmond complaining about the economic growth that was fuelled by the credit boom. Like everyone else, he has been caught out by the crisis. Any attempt to persuade the voters that he could have prevented disaster, if only Scotland had been free of the shackles of the Union, is stretching credulity too far.

Nothing exemplifies Salmond's mishandling of the crisis more than his bellicose demand that Whitehall hand Holyrood £1bn of "Scotland's money". On close examination, this turned out to be a sensible request for a Barnett Formula share of new government spending in England – such as the money being spent on regenerating East London in advance of the 2012 Olympics. (I know a little about this. In 1990 I helped the investigative journalist George Rosie prepare his groundbreaking Scotching The Myth series for this newspaper, revealing the hidden subsidies given to London and the south-east of England.) The argument for Scotland's £1bn has legitimacy, and Westminster must respond constructively. But Salmond's demand was belligerent and confrontational. Worse, it looked as if the Scottish Government's first response to the challenge of global recession and international belt-tightening was to stick its hand out and ask for more cash.

We expect better than that. What we deserve from Salmond today is a speech worthy of a national leader in a time of crisis. In many ways, given his experience as an economist, he is the ideal man for the job. We'll forgive him a bit of Brown-bashing and some misty-eyed talk of independence being just over the next ridge to pacify the conference faithful. But this should be a speech for all Scots, regardless of what degree of home rule they favour.

We need action on three main fronts: an injection of money into infrastructure projects to boost the Scottish economy; a new emphasis on skills and education to aid retraining of the unemployed and prepare young Scots for an uncertain future; and an overhaul of the social work and benefits system to ensure there is maximum support for those who lose their jobs. We need these pursued in a spirit of co-operation with Westminster.

What's more, we need an honest appraisal from Salmond of the macroeconomic impact of contentious SNP policies such as local income tax and the Scottish Futures Trust. If they are seen as in any way disadvantaging Scotland's economy in the most demanding of times, they should be shelved for the time being. 

No pet projects, no partisan posturing, no constitutional distractions should get in the way of a national effort to protect Scots from the worst of the coming recession. The slogan pinned to the wall of Bill Clinton's campaign war-room in Little Rock during the 1992 US presidential campaign, penned by his chief strategist James 'Ragin' Cajun' Carville, said: "The economy, stupid." For Salmond as well as for the rest of us, it's the writing on the wall.
