NOT long ago I took my sons on a Saturday afternoon walk from Glasgow city centre through the East End to Parkhead.
The Barras, as usual, was great fun and we stocked up on knock-off DVDs. But the Glasgow we encountered on the rest of the journey wasn't a pretty sight. What was most striking was not the poverty or the dereliction or the vandalism or the sectarian ADVERTISEMENTparaphernalia, although all these were unavoidable. Nor was it the two used syringes we saw, one on the pavement and one on a grass verge. What made the deepest impression was the appalling health of the locals - the wheezing men in their 50s leaning on walking sticks; the complexions, either pasty or grey; the ubiquitous smoking that conjured up a line from a Michael Marra song about men sucking desperately on their last half-inch of roll-up, "like Virginia is in flames". 

This is the part of the city that will now be transformed into the home of the Commonwealth Games in 2014, and I have to say it won't come a day too soon. No corner of Scotland is more in need of some tender loving care, a few new jobs and some better homes. But the increased scrutiny on the dire state of the East End poses an obvious dilemma for the city fathers, as they still like to call themselves, as 2014 approaches. 

They know the Games are a marvellous opportunity for Glasgow to present itself to the world as the dynamic, sophisticated, stylish city we know it can be, once it has cleaned behind its ears and donned its gladrags. The Games allow Glasgow to sell itself as a tourist destination, a seat of learning and a place to do business. The images of athletic prowess will be used to project a vigorous and energetic impression of Glasgow and Scotland as a whole. So the temptation will be to gloss over - perhaps literally - the grimier side of the city's life. 

We've been here before. During Glasgow's reign as European city of culture in 1990, the authorities were accused of trying to airbrush the 'real' Glasgow out of the picture being projected to the world. Glasgow culture, the critics said, wasn't just Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Ken Currie and Alasdair Gray. Fairly or unfairly, the 1990 event organisers were told they were selling a falsehood. 

This can't be allowed to happen this time. Glasgow's East End is a tough challenge for any PR executive trying to sell the city as lean and fit and muscular. Yes, Glasgow is 'Scotland with style' as the advertising slogan proclaims. But it is also 'Scotland with late-onset diabetes and a perpetual sick note'. 

The city fathers would be foolish to try to camouflage the reality. Instead, a degree of humility and honesty is required. All those in power need to acknowledge a truth: that the problems of Glasgow's East End are an indictment of the council and successive Scottish and British governments. 

All must accept that Glasgow's poverty and its associated problems will now become a top political priority. Not because the Games are coming, but because it is simply the right thing to do, and has been too low down the list of priorities in the past. 

To do this, the SNP Government will have to engage in a kind of politics for which it is not ideally suited. It's only recently that the Nationalists have become a party with a substantial presence in Scotland's urban heartlands. It is not used to having to wrestle with improving the skills, morale, education, health and employability of the thousands of Glaswegians existing on state handouts from one year to the next. 

Tackling this will require a willingness on the part of Westminster and Holyrood to work together on imaginative reforms to the welfare system - even if they have to be dressed up as 'pilot schemes' to get round the constitutional niceties, given that welfare is reserved to Westminster. It will also require Salmond to show the same kind of interest in tackling sectarianism as was shown by Labour's Jack McConnell. Again, this can't be avoided just because it doesn't fit in with the image Scotland will be trying to project. 

The Games will bring many benefits. For one thing, they will help re-balance the relationship between Scotland's two biggest cities. During the 1980s and early 1990s, Glasgow ruled the roost. But over the past decade the birth of the Scottish Parliament has helped Edinburgh regain its status as a true capital city, sloughing off its pan-loafy reputation and giving it the kind of cosmopolitan feel that Glasgow long claimed as its own. 

Of course, Glasgow hasn't been standing still. Impressive new building projects now line the banks of the Clyde downstream from the city centre. The writing-off of the city's £900m housing debt by the Treasury has kickstarted Europe's biggest programme of housing regeneration. Culturally, Glasgow is still unrivalled (look out for two fantastic new bands, The Twilight Sad and 1990s). But as a political entity the place once known as the Second City of the Empire has lost some of its swagger. It's time for that to change. 

There is one more task the leaders of Glasgow and Scotland must not shirk. The city's rival for the Games was Abuja, and from the faces of the Nigerian delegation on Friday afternoon their abject disappointment was plain. The Abuja campaigners had hoped the Games could be a spur for tourism and foreign investment in the most populous country in Africa. 

Scotland already has strong historical and cultural ties with Africa, notably in Malawi where the Scottish Government is involved in a range of health and education projects. We must not forget: there is now another African nation to which we owe a moral debt.

