WHAT does Alex Salmond believe in? His own considerable abilities, obviously. An independent Scotland, naturally. Heart of Midlothian Football Club, inexplicably. But what else?
Let's rephrase the question. What are Alex Salmond's values? What are the moral and philosophical instincts he brings to the job of leading his country as First Minister? 

These should be easy questions to answer. We live in an age when a politicaADVERTISEMENTl party's chance of success is wholly bound up in the personality of its leader. That's why our leading politicians are perpetually telling us what makes them tick as individuals. 

A good politician needs a good 'backstory': Bill Clinton came from a town called Hope; Barack Obama travelled to Africa to find the father he never knew; John Major was a boy from Brixton whose ambition was to be a bus conductor; Gordon Brown was born into a Kirkcaldy manse where the kitchen door was always open to the parish poor. Even Jack McConnell had a backstory: he was the shepherd's son who learned his people skills serving scones to tourists at the family croft on Arran. 

Each of these stories provided a window into the heart of a man who was seeking power, giving voters a shorthand way of understanding the values he would bring to the job of running the country. So what is Salmond's story? All the other party leaders used their conference speeches this autumn to say: "This is me." Salmond was the only one who didn't. 

We think we know Alexander Elliot Anderson Salmond. He is a big personality, instantly recognisable. But in truth he doesn't offer us many psychological insights. Even his colleagues confess he's hard to read. I've been interviewing him for 15 years and have heard him speak dozens of times, and I must admit I'm not much the wiser as to what lies at his "irreducible core", to use Tony Blair's phrase. 

Admittedly, he does explain where his love of his native land comes from - learning the stories of Bruce and Wallace as a boy at his grandfather's knee. Is this enough? No it isn't. 

Being First Minister is about more than simply standing up for Scotland. Salmond's Government is faced with a range of moral and social questions that will shape the kind of society we live in. In all likelihood the SNP will be in power at Holyrood for a decade or more, so Salmond's opportunity to stamp his personal imprint on Scotland cannot be underestimated. 

As a society we face an ever-lengthening list of dilemmas: how far sex education should go in schools; whether scientists should be allowed to use human embryos for research; whether the state should reward marriage; how the law should acknowledge same-sex relationships; how to deal with disruptive kids in the classroom; how to balance punishment and rehabilitation in our criminal justice system; whether voluntary euthanasia is beyond the moral pale; how to tackle Scotland's sick-note culture; how punitive to be about soft drug use; whether pupils should wear school uniform; how to control immigration; how to combat racism and intolerance. 

I'm not sure anyone can say with certainty where Salmond stands on all - or any - of these. His voting record is of little help - on gay rights, for example, Salmond was absent for all 11 key votes in the House of Commons between 1998-2003. And that's before we get to the economic questions of balancing social justice with an enterprise economy, where Salmond has been speaking with a forked tongue for a decade, and getting away with it. 

It's not enough for Salmond to hide behind the fact that many of these issues are currently decided at Westminster. If he had his way they would all be decided at an independent Holyrood. 

Of course, I have my gut feeling about where Salmond stands. His obvious empathy with the late Cardinal Tom Winning and the fundamentalist Christian tycoon Brian Souter suggest he is a social conservative. So too, insofar as this is any guide, does his upbringing in a Linlithgow home that sounds a paragon of 1950s suburban middle-class respectability. 

He is not a reader. One visitor to his home commented on the apparent lack of books. Nor can a clue be gleaned from his appreciation of culture, in which he takes only a dutiful interest. He is an economist - he once explained to me that while some people could see beauty in a landscape or a poem, he could see beauty in a column of numbers. At the time I gave him the benefit of the doubt and assumed he was being self-deprecating. Now I'm not so sure. 

A study published last week confirmed what we already suspected - that the SNP's victory in May was not down to a sudden desire for independence or a widespread enthusiasm for SNP manifesto commitments on fisheries policy or not-for-profit Scottish bonds. It was almost wholly due to the voters' personal liking for Salmond and their instinctive belief that he would make a more convincing national leader than Jack McConnell. It was Alex wot won it. 

It's time he opened up a little. We need to know his personal takes on the challenges - social, moral and economic - that Scotland faces. Then we can give them the scrutiny they deserve. Will the real Alex Salmond please stand up?
