THE mere mention of the words 'SNP party conference' produces a Pavlovian reaction in me. Immediately my temples begin to throb and a queasy feeling grips my gut. I feel a sudden urge for a bottle of Irn Bru, a bacon roll and a wee lie down. Boy oh boy, this party can drink. At an SNP conference the only constitutional question that really matters is whether you have the constitution to survive the boozing.
As it's the SNP, everyone seems compelled to drink whisky, even when it's against their better judgment. So the conference bars are full of punchy drunks, tearful drunks and loquacious drunks. You can see why SNP conferences are by far the most enjoyADVERTISEMENTable on the political calendar, and why delegates and hangers-on start lining their stomachs around about August. 

A conference takes on a very different complexion when a party is in government. It shifts from being a useful platform for gaining publicity to a potential disaster, with endless scope for embarrassing Government ministers who can no longer promise the moon on a stick. They have practicalities to deal with, and the inconvenient requirement to balance a budget. 

This weekend's shindig in Aviemore comes too early in the Nationalists' honeymoon period to cause any serious grief for the SNP leadership. Why cause trouble when there's a three-day festival of preening and self-congratulation to be enjoyed? But in the months to come, Salmond will ignore his party activists at his peril. It's increasingly clear where the aggro is going to come from. 

Not from the usual suspects. Most commentators, myself included, wrongly predicted that Salmond's biggest headache would be the impatience of the fundamentalists when faced with his gradualist approach to independence. Salmond still has to watch his back on this one, which is why his leader's speech in Aviemore today will be heavy on empty rhetoric about independence. But the fundies are cowed, for the time being. 

The bigger danger for him now comes courtesy of a more familiar political tussle - the one between right and left. It's a mistake to think the SNP is solely the preserve of misty-eyed sentimentalists whose primary motivation is an independent Scotland. Not so. SNP ranks are full of activists whose primary political motivation is social justice rather than national self-determination. They believe the SNP represents the best vehicle for achieving a more socialist Scotland. There's also a sizeable number of former Labour supporters who switched allegiance during the 1990s, frustrated at the way Tony Blair was dragging Labour into the centre ground of British politics. What matters to them is the political shade of the Government, not whether there's a Saltire or a Union flag flying from the flagpole. 

I know for a fact that some socialists within the SNP are looking at the Scottish Government they helped elect and experiencing a twinge of concern. That twinge will turn into a twitch with the news that Sir George Mathewson, former chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland and now the man at the helm of Salmond's Council of Economic Advisers, is to lead an inquiry into whether the size of Scotland's public sector is holding the country back. 

Now, Mathewson has a point. The balance between public and private in Scotland is indeed out of kilter. But when some socialists listen to talk of this kind all they hear is the potential for swingeing cuts in public services, and they do not like it one little bit. Nor are socialist SNP activists convinced by the desire of Jim Mather, Minister for Enterprise, for cuts in corporation tax and business rates. Surely, they say, there are more deserving Scots than businessmen and shareholders? When John Swinney, the finance secretary, talks about cutting Scottish Enterprise down to size, reducing the role the state plays in influencing Scotland's private sector, it only confirms their suspicions. 

This was always going to be a problem when the SNP achieved power. The party is an unlikely alliance of contradictory interests - urban and rural, socialist and conservative, authoritarian and libertarian. In opposition such differences can be camouflaged. In government there is nowhere to hide. 

The socialists within the SNP are sincere and committed. They're not the kind of people who will stay mum for the sake of party unity, not when values close to their heart are concerned. And future SNP party conferences will be the forum for their discontent. 

Personally, I miss the SNP conferences of old: the days when Siol nan Gaidheal members stood outside the venue in their fascist-looking black T-shirts; when wee Donald from the Scottish Republican Socialist Party would regale delegates for selling out to the mainstream; when Alex Neil could compare a Labour politician to a Nazi collaborator; and Kenny MacAskill could refer to the England international football team as "The Great Satan". Naturally, both of those comments received standing ovations. 

Boozing continues, of course. Just as well MacAskill, now Justice Secretary, spoke on the first day of the conference before serious drinking could get under way. Otherwise his critique of Scotland's booze culture would have been warmly applauded by a hall full of hangovers. There's only so much modernising a party can cope with, after all.
