EUROPE is an issue that can worm its way into a politician's marrow, superseding party allegiances and becoming an obsession.
Margaret Thatcher's most dangerous enemies were Europhiles such as Michael Heseltine and Ken Clarke, who seemed more exercised about relations with Brussels than trifling matters such as 3.6 million unemployed here at home. John Major labelled three ADVERTISEMENTfellow Cabinet members "bastards" because of their stubborn Europhobia. Their constant attrition cost him his credibility as a leader. Between 1979 and 1997 there were more ministerial resignations over Europe than anything else - if you discount the Major Government's weakness for sexual misdemeanours. 

The sharp-eyed reader will have noticed this body count is all Tory. Maybe not for long. This week we'll begin to discover if Europe can be a political albatross for a Labour Prime Minister too. 

Gordon Brown came back from the European Union summit in Portugal last week feeling reasonably pleased with himself. The PM bragged that he had won British opt-outs from the new EU treaty, one on home affairs and another on the new "charter of fundamental human rights". But the diplomacy in Lisbon was the easy part. 

Now he has to sell the deal to the country. His performance in this week's Commons debate on Europe will be a litmus test of whether he can convince ordinary Britons there is no need for a referendum on the new EU arrangements. 

Labour's current position is simply dishonest. In the Commons on April 20, 2004, Tony Blair promised the country a say on the rather grandiose European constitution that was under discussion at that time. Blair was all for taking the fight to the Eurosceptics. "Let the issue be put. Let the battle be joined," he said. 

Except the British public never got the chance. The constitution was rejected by a number of other European countries and quietly ditched. In its place, Brussels came up with the treaty we have before us today. Many backbench Labour MPs concede that the difference between that constitution and the current treaty is minimal. Yet Brown's position is that the people, this time, have no right to have their say. The arrogance is breathtaking, all the more so because this is a fundamental question of trust and democracy. 

Across all political parties there is an acceptance that major constitutional changes should be put to the public vote, as happened on Europe in 1974 and on devolution in 1979 and 1997. Yet most commentators looking at Brown's attitude to Europe seem to accept the cynical view that no sane PM would hold a referendum unless he was sure of victory. Political expediency apparently takes precedence. What kind of democracy is that? 

Fundamental democratic rights cannot be withheld out of fear they will produce the 'wrong' result. The only morally justifiable position is to support a proper vote, regardless of where you stand on the issue. Other examples provide some perspective. If Scotland was to have control over abortion law, the likely result would be more restrictions on a woman's right to choose - an outcome I personally would find abhorrent. Yet I believe Scottish MSPs should have that power nonetheless. 

Similarly in countries where the West has introduced an element of democracy - in Iraq and Afghanistan, for example - the voters there should be allowed the freedom to elect whoever they want without interference from the US or the UK, however well-intentioned and whatever the likely outcome. Anything less serves only to devalue the international political currency of democracy itself. 

Blair understood the power of giving people their say, even though his motives were sometimes misunderstood. When he insisted in the mid-1990s that Labour's plans for a Scottish Parliament needed to be put to not one but two votes of the Scottish people in a referendum, he was roundly accused of attempting to scupper home rule. As this newspaper's political editor at that time, I added my tuppenceworth of outrage. I now accept I was wrong. 

Alastair Campbell's diaries, published in the summer, revealed the true reason for Blair's insistence on a vote - he had learnt a lesson from history. Blair had been reading Roy Jenkins's biography of Gladstone and had been struck by that prime minister's troubles in securing home rule for Ireland. 

Blair concluded that Gladstone failed because he had backed off from difficult, but necessary decisions on devolving power for fear of upsetting enthusiasts within his own party. The result was failure and missed opportunity, with tragic consequences. 

Who now would say that Blair was wrong? The resounding backing for Scottish home rule in the 1997 referendum secured Holyrood in perpetuity. It ensured that, when the devolution project was looking shaky a few years back, there was no suggestion of going back to Westminster rule or curbing the parliament's financial powers. The people had spoken. 

The lesson for Brown is clear. Dodging a referendum will not succeed in making Euroscepticism go away. It will only feed its wrath. Not until the arguments are tested by the people can Brown have a chance of defeating the extreme Europhobes and dampening the over-enthusiasm of the Europhiles. The Prime Minister should agree to a referendum. If the people say no, so be it. It's democracy, stupid.
