 BET Jack Straw still has nightmares about the moment in New York three years ago when an elderly African chap at a lunchtime reception at the United Nations offered him an outstretched hand in greeting.
Straw, who was Foreign Secretary at the time, was working the room and instinctively grasped the hand and shook it, muttering a pleasant "nice to see you". It's still unclear how many nanoseconds it took Straw to realise that the elderly chap was in ADVERTISEMENTfact President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, the megalomaniac tyrant who had brought one of Africa's proudest nations to its knees. 

For fans of car-crash television, Straw's subsequent explanation of what had happened was essential viewing, coming perilously close to an admission that "all these African fellows look the same to me, y'know". In fact, he said: "I was sort of being pushed towards shaking hands with somebody as a matter of courtesy, and then it transpired it was President Mugabe." Apparently, he'd also passed Osama bin Laden on the stairs and stood next to Saddam Hussein in the gents. 

Understandable, then, that Gordon Brown wants to avoid a similar encounter at the European Union summit on Africa, scheduled for Lisbon in December. Downing Street last week made it clear to the organisers: if Mugabe's going, the Prime Minister isn't. 

Brown's decision was not taken lightly, nor should it have been. There is serious business to be done in Portugal, and Africa's problems do not begin and end at Zimbabwe's borders. HIV, poverty, education, climate change, economic development, corruption - these are all areas where Europe can make a difference across Africa, and in the process save countless lives. 

The stay-away strategy is an unusual one for Britain to pursue. It goes against the diplomatic orthodoxy that the Foreign Office adopts elsewhere in the world - in China and Iran, for example - where no matter how serious the disagreement with a troublesome state, the Brits will still engage. Yet the sheer scale of the calamity visiting Zimbabwe now demands that the usual diplomatic niceties are junked. 

As we detail in our report on page 23, the country is close to economic and political collapse, with 80% unemployment, inflation at 6,500% and the thugs in the ruling Zanu-PF party resorting to ever more brutal tactics to retain power. Half the country's remaining population of nine million is in need of emergency food aid. 

Brown's decision will not be consequence-free. Ghana, currently leading the African Union, wants Mugabe to be treated as any other African leader in Lisbon. There's a risk that in the parts of Africa where Mugabe is still regarded as a freedom fighter against white tyranny, resentment towards Britain will harden. Gertrude Mongella, Tanzanian president of the Pan-African Parliament, last week said of Brown's stance: "I think this is again another way of manipulating Africa." 

Mugabe himself will continue to bleat about "British imperialism", knowing full well the buttons that presses in the white liberal conscience. But can we really allow our moral choices to be swayed by notions of collective guilt for events that took place before we were born? It would be cowardly to use that as an excuse for doing nothing. 

Brown is taking a risk in another sense as well. There is something about British public opinion that's instinctively sceptical about politicians attempting good deeds in Africa. In the summer, David Cameron was traduced in the London press for having the audacity to be in Rwanda when England mopped up after its floods. How dare he try to save African children from starvation, cried Middle England. Doesn't he know my cellar's knee-deep in water? 

And before we in Scotland congratulate ourselves on our moral superiority, let's just remember the widespread sneering at Jack McConnell's laudable initiatives in Malawi when he was First Minister, bringing teaching materials and Scots medics to one of the poorest nations on the planet. Beset with practical difficulties the McConnell schemes may have been, but they couldn't be faulted on the justness of the cause. 

Enlightened self-interest should be reason enough for us taking a close interest in Africa. The growth in economic and political power seen in India and China in recent years will be replicated in Africa in due course. The continent offers vast reserves of natural resources and cheap labour. China has already recognised the need to forge new alliances with African states and is starting to eclipse the influence of the British and French in some areas. 

Of course, there is an element of gesture in what Brown is doing. If the Prime Minister himself does not attend the Lisbon gathering, there will still be a British delegation at the conference. If Mugabe does stay away he will be represented by some other representative of his tawdry regime, possibly one of his closest cronies in the form of foreign minister Simbarashe Mumbengegwi. 

The risks in alienating opinion at home and abroad have been weighed by Brown, a cautious man by instinct, and still he has decided to take a stand. It's a commendable decision, and a heartening one for anybody who believes that politics can still be a power for good in the world. Here at Scotland on Sunday we have made our own small contribution with our successful campaign to have Mugabe stripped of his honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh. Another gesture, perhaps, but in the pursuit of an honourable goal even gestures have their place.

