THERE is an Elvis Costello song from his 1989 album Spike that looks forward to the day when Margaret Thatcher dies. He says that when Thatcher eventually passes away he'll be paying a visit to the cemetery. "When they finally put you in the ground," he sings, "I'll stand on your grave and tramp the dirt down."
Costello may find himself having to join an orderly queue. Almost 17 years after she resigned as Prime Minister, Thatcher remains the most loathed politician in Britain. Even the venom lately heaped on Tony Blair is as nothing compared to the hatred ADVERTISEMENTshe attracted when in office, and which lingers still in the minds of millions. 

You'd never know this from the way Thatcher is routinely regarded these days by most politicians and commentators. The received wisdom on her premiership is one of admiration mingled with awe. Airbrushed from their verdict is the most divisive period in modern British history, the product of a deliberate political strategy that saw poverty and strife as useful tools of social and economic engineering. 

In its revisionist reappraisal of the Thatcher years, New Labour is guilty of an obscene over-reaction. You don't have to be a red-blooded socialist to have found the sight of Gordon Brown welcoming Thatcher to a cosy lunch at Downing Street last week as distasteful, misjudged and opportunistic. 

There was something ridiculous about the scene on the Downing Street doorstep as the Baroness arrived, looking frail and every one of her 81 years. While Brown tried to usher her indoors he was desperately trying to avoid touching her back with his hand or outstretched arm. Maybe he instinctively realised that this would be a solecism too far. 

Those still in awe of Thatcher are suffering from false memory syndrome. Conveniently forgotten is the economic uncertainty of a decade of boom and bust. They believe her three general election victories were won due to her steely conviction and intellectual rigour. In fact her political longevity was primarily the result of a weak and divided opposition, for which the Militant Tendency and the breakaway SDP share equal responsibility. 

There is no doubt that after the sclerosis of the 1970s Britain badly needed reform. What it got was revolution, fuelled by a careless disregard for the human cost. The positive legacy of the Thatcher years - the sale of council housing, the curbing of trade union excesses, the modernisation of the command economy, the new emphasis on individual responsibility - all of these could have been achieved by a more humane Conservatism. None required the brutality and class war beloved of Maggie, with her instinct to swing her handbag first and ask questions afterwards. Britain as a society is temperamentally conducive to incremental change. It is a national virtue. Instead, Thatcher played it like a palace coup. 

During the Thatcher years I lived in three different parts of Britain. In each, in different ways, Thatcher made a mockery of the beatitudes she quoted on her entry to Downing Street. In the English Midlands there was racial unrest and the destruction of traditional heavy engineering. In Scotland there was outrage at her refusal to countenance home rule and a distinctive Scottish political identity. In South Wales during the miners' strike I watched communities destroyed, the result of ideological intransigence on the part of both the government and the NUM, the latter led by a dolt. 

The reason why Brown and David Cameron are now jostling for the dubious privilege of being seen by Middle Britain as Thatcher's contemporary heir is clear, and not a little depressing. They are courting those who hanker back to a golden age when a particularly nasty strain of selfishness and greed was sanctioned by government, and when intolerance was tolerated. For these people, and the newspapers that distil and amplify their prejudices, the Thatcher years are a lost Arcadia. 

Brown describes himself as a conviction politician who puts his dearly-held values at the heart of his politics. Yet he knows fine what buttons he is pressing when he breaks bread with Mrs T. There's an unpleasant word for what he is doing, and the word is "pandering". There are some kinds of political support that are not worth having. 

I assume neither Brown nor Cameron is foolish enough to try to ape the Iron Lady's political persona. In 2007, firm government Thatcher-style is the last thing most people want from their politicians. In fact, it's a haunting folk memory from the Thatcher years that now makes the British public recoil from any political creed that promotes division and confrontation. It's because of her that politicians of all hues now instinctively grope for the middle ground and crave consensus. No one has the stomach for a country at war with itself, thank goodness. 

So maybe it's time our political leaders stopped bending the knee to the Blessed Margaret. The country has moved on. The Britain that Thatcher inherited in 1979 seems today like a different planet. The Britain she bequeathed to John Major in 1990 is more familiar in some ways, but since then the country has made enormous advances in tolerance, social responsibility and technological change. Our politicians should apply themselves to the world as it is today, not hark back to a skewed vision of a past age. 

Personally, I wish the Baroness a long life. When her day comes, as come it must, I have no intention of joining Elvis Costello at her graveside wearing my Doc Martens. But I won't be blaming anybody who does.
