POLITICS is often described as "the art of the possible". Unfortunately, politicians often misread this as "the art of what's possible to get away with". Too often they seem to be living in a parallel moral universe with its own rules and imperatives. Here, anything goes. In their own minds politicians are locked in total war against their chosen foes, and there is no Geneva Convention. Not for nothing do they routinely refer to people outwith their party circle as "civilians".
It means they sometimes get the most obvious things wildly, spectacularly wrong. For example it's rare to find an MP or MSP who fully appreciates the venom with which the public dislikes politicians. Our leaders cling to the naive belief that the manADVERTISEMENTand woman in the street will give them the benefit of the doubt, taking what they say at face value. I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but this is not the case, and arguably never has been. 

Politicians' self-delusion was all too apparent last week after this newspaper published its front-page exclusive story about cash-for-access and the SNP Government. To recap, we revealed that lobby groups and corporations were being offered personal access to Alex Salmond, newly-elected First Minister of Scotland, for a fee of £9,500. For this price, a vested interest could buy time with the leader of the Scottish Government at the forthcoming SNP party conference. With the First Minister as star guest at their "premier" event on the conference fringe, they could buttonhole him about any policy or law they wanted introduced, tweaked or revoked. 

It would be money well spent. Lobbying is a multi-million-pound industry in Scotland. There are dozens of 'public affairs' firms in Edinburgh whose sole purpose is to ensure their clients' commercial interests are protected from - and promoted within - the Scottish Government. 

Lobbying is an entirely legitimate activity when conducted through the proper channels. There are recognised ways for a company or a cause to make its case to a minister, with civil servants present to ensure propriety. Lobbying should not involve signing a cheque to a political party. That only confirms the public's worst suspicions - that politicians can be bought. It brings the entire political system into disrepute. 

Our story was a genuine political story, and I'm sure most Scots recognised it as such. But there were some in the political village - and not just Nationalists - who couldn't see what all the fuss was about. Their argument went something like this: 'Why get upset? All political parties do this. It's the way things have always been done.' 

There are two points to make here. The first is to say 'yes, other parties have been involved in similar activity in the past and have rightly been skewered for it' - although, I have to say, seldom has the leader of a Government been so shamelessly touted around for cash. The more important point is a simple one that will be familiar to every parent who has ever had to discipline a child: just because the others are doing it doesn't make it right. 

If it's acceptable to buy a politician's time, what else can you buy? His advice? His sympathy? His vote? Where do you draw the line? 

It has become axiomatic that not only does politics have to be above board, it has to be seen to be above board. A perception of impropriety is almost as damming as impropriety itself. For this reason, the entire system of giving cash to political parties in Britain has recently been overhauled, and rightly so. 

The case for state funding of parties and a ban on other fundraising is now irresistible. It may be a sad truth, but it is a truth nonetheless: when there is the slightest possibility of graft there is a presumption deeply, and perhaps permanently, engrained in the public's mind to believe the worst. 

Not even the most laudable cause is immune from this public cynicism. For this reason, and with a heavy heart, I predict that Gordon Brown is heading for a political furore over the multi-million-pound charity run by his wife, Sarah, in memory of their daughter Jennifer, who died when she was just 10 days old in 2002. 

In the five years since PiggyBankKids was founded its achievements have been astonishing. With the help of individual and corporate donations, the charity has established a research centre at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh under the leadership of Professor Andrew Calder examining pre-eclampsia and other conditions. It is a superb effort, of which Sarah Brown - the PiggyBankKids president - can be justly proud. But you can already see the questions that will be asked. Cynical questions, perhaps. Politically motivated, maybe. But inevitable questions given the poor state of the public's trust in its political leaders. 

For example, what are the true motives of the tycoons and corporations who have donated large sums of money and come along to PiggyBankKids dinners and fund-raising events attended by Brown and his wife? Is it simply to donate to a good cause? Or could there be another, additional motive: to gain access to, and win the goodwill of, the man who was previously Chancellor of the Exchequer and is now Prime Minister? If so, is this acceptable? 

Uncomfortable questions, yes. But they are the consequence of a public distrust that is entirely of politicians' own making. New to the business of government, Alex Salmond and the SNP were in a unique position to start to build a new bond of faith with a sceptical electorate, to say it was no longer business as usual. Not any more. It is an opportunity lost.

