MY NAME is Kenny, and I'm addicted to Facebook. Phew, that feels better. Good to get it out there. After all, it's only by acknowledging our failings that we can begin to address them. I admit, I do have a terrible weakness for the networking website that allows you to create a cosy online community of yourself and your friends, sharing details about your everyday life on matters both important and trivial.
I'm not alone. An estimated 150,000 Scots are Facebook users. The site's Edinburgh network alone has 34,000 members and is increasing in size by 10% every fortnight. This has not gone unnoticed by some employers. Last week it was revealed that companADVERTISEMENTies including Standard Life have blocked office access to networking sites such as Facebook, MySpace and Bebo. Managers said some employees were pottering around on these sites for up to three hours a day when they should have been working. 

Well, I'm not quite that bad. Honest, boss. 

There is, however, a more fundamental objection to Facebook. It's the reason why some of my real-life friends have rebuffed invitations to join me as online Facebook friends. They are uncomfortable with the whole concept of putting personal details about your life - anything from your occupation to your favourite band of the moment - into the public domain. 

"Don't you know how much information they can get on you already," asked one exasperated pal. "I don't want to give them any more ammunition and neither should you." 

By "they" and "them", he means the array of corporate and governmental organisations who glean tiny details about every aspect of our lives as we make our way through a normal day. Our Tesco Clubcard logs our preference for Mackie's ice cream over Häagen Dazs, and the extent to which we are willing to pay through the nose for organic veg. 

Every time we use Google, the subject of our interest is logged on a computer the size of East Kilbride, somewhere in middle America. Our cash withdrawals at hole-in-the-wall machines chart our travels though our cities and our credit cards tot up how much we have been spending - and where. 

CCTV cameras catch us at every corner and, if we are driving, vehicle registration recognition keeps tabs on our progress. Oh, and our mobile phones - even switched off - can be used by the security services at any time to pinpoint our exact location to within a couple of yards. 

I know all this to be the case. I know that to some people it is a fundamental issue of personal liberty. (There are still those among us for whom Big Brother is a portent of totalitarianism from a book written in 1949 and not a reality TV show.) 

I know it... and I have decided to ignore it. I have come to the conclusion that it's not worth worrying about it in the slightest, or giving it a moment's extra thought. And I would urge you to do the same for the good of your mental health. 

There is an Irish comedian called Kevin McAleer whose act perfectly illustrates the dangers of getting too worried about "them". In his show Chalk & Cheese he plays a man who is utterly paranoid. This man describes what it's like to visit a new town and be confronted with a map on a wall with an arrow saying: 'You are here.' Perturbed, the man asks: "How do they know?" 

Resistance is futile. Anonymity in the 21st century is an impossibility, unless you are willing to spend the rest of your life in the gloom of a Highland cave eating barbecued squirrel. The price of living in the information age is surrendering some information about yourself, and accepting that it will be available to people who want to keep an eye on you or sell you something. Get used to it. 

This is why I refuse to get unduly worried about identity cards or entitlement cards, even though people I know and respect tell me that such developments are an affront to my personal freedom and my human rights. My simple reasoning is that I cannot see an alternative. The technology that allows such information gathering cannot be uninvented. 

Of course, the worst excesses of an information free-for-all can be curbed, up to a point. Google, in particular, has become a global force capable of building up an unprecedented picture of an individual's financial, political, cultural and moral make-up. There is a respectable argument that information held by Google on any individual should be destroyed after an agreed period of time. But any such action can only have a marginal effect, and we should accept that reality. 

As for my Facebook addiction, well I'm trying to ration my visits to two a day, one in the morning when I start work and one in the evening when I clock off. I've also, if you're interested, set up a Facebook group called "Scotland on Sunday readers" so that every Friday you can be given a sneak preview of what's going to be published in the following weekend's paper. Come and join us... if you dare.
