MY MUM, Nancy, goes into hospital next Saturday morning for an operation to replace a knee.
It's a bit of a worry, of course. But she's already looking forward to being fighting fit and active again. She'll be able to return to her OAP aerobics class - although from what I hear they usually spend more time gossiping than exercising. And sheADVERTISEMENT'll be able to walk to the newsagents every day to buy her copy of the Dundee Courier, so she can once again send me cuttings about old school friends who have done well for themselves or ended up in court. 

When her letter came through from the National Health Service last month there were two surprises. Instead of the operation taking place at Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, as we were expecting, she was told it would happen at Stracathro Hospital near Brechin, in Angus. 

The other curiosity was that her treatment would not be carried out by the NHS. It would be done by one of the world's biggest private healthcare companies, Netcare, which is based in South Africa. 

Netcare currently has a £15m three-year deal with the Scottish government to carry out 8,000 knee and hip replacements at Stracathro to ease waiting-list logjams in Grampian, Tayside and Fife. The company has been handed a disused ward at the hospital and given access to operating theatres in the evenings and at weekends when they are not used routinely by NHS staff. 

My mother spent half of her adult life working for the NHS and is devoted to its ethos. Although her job was in administration she always referred to it as "saving lives" and she took pride in being part of the finest public healthcare service in the world. But she sees no problem in being treated under this new arrangement between the NHS and the private sector. Nor do I. It means my mum will get her operation much quicker than would otherwise have been the case. Nancy will soon be back to her fit and energetic old self, god help us. 

My mum's experience was just one of the reasons I raised a small cheer last week when I listened to Wendy Alexander describe her priorities as the new leader of the Scottish Labour Party. There would be four guiding principles on her watch, she said: a "compassionate yet competitive economy"; "developing Scottish solutions for Scottish aspirations"; "empowering people and communities, not institutions"; and "consumer not producer-focused public services". 

Once you dig beneath the jargon, each of these is a welcome departure - not least the clear signal that Labour is at last prepared to get behind the campaign for greater Scottish home rule within the UK. 

But it's the last promise, about public services, that's by far the most heartening, especially at a time when the SNP seems hell-bent on an ideological purge of private companies from Scotland's public services, regardless of the effect on ordinary Scots. 

One of the first things Nicola Sturgeon did when she became Health Secretary in the new Holyrood government in May was to make clear there would be no more Stracathro-style experiments in the Scottish NHS under SNP rule. Private health firms would not be welcome any more in Scotland's health service, despite clear evidence from England that they can reduce NHS times through their flexibility and specialisation. 

Perhaps inevitably for a party that spent more than 70 years in opposition before finally coming to power, the SNP is notorious for pandering to vested interest groups, particularly in the trade union movement and the professions. When a health or education union official says anything, the SNP reflex is to agree. 

It doesn't seem to have occurred to the Nationalists that what is in the best interest of Unison or the Educational Institute of Scotland may not be in the best interest of my mother or my sons. The idea that the government should be on the side of the consumer of public services and not the producer still seems foreign to them. 

Alexander's statement of guiding principles will come to be a turning point for Scottish Labour. Scotland never saw the modernisation of public services that England experienced under Tony Blair. Under the rule of First Ministers Dewar, McLeish and McConnell there was a tacit deal with the trade unions not to rock the boat too much in the public sector. (McLeish did try to edge away from this with his "what matters is what works" initiative, but he was not in power long enough to see it through.) 

As a result, Scots have been left with a health service that is significantly less efficient than its English counterpart and an education system with far less choice and diversity. 

Alexander has served notice that this will no longer do. About time too. The depressing aspect, of course, is that it has taken an electoral gubbing for Labour to come to this conclusion. Alexander is now in opposition rather than in power. Labour's conversion is welcome but far too late. 

It's now up to Sturgeon to justify herself to Scottish patients. Why is she rejecting health reforms that have been shown to make ill people better more quickly? Does the SNP's ideological attachment to the health unions really take precedence over its duty of care to NHS patients? 

What's Nicola got to say for herself about Nancy's knee?
