ALEX Salmond likes to tell a story about a constituent from Banff who travelled to London to visit him at the House of Commons.
With time to kill, the man joined the tourist throng and took a twirl on the London Eye. High above London, a tour guide pointed out obvious sights like Big Ben and then drew their attention to Portcullis House, the fancy new office block for MPs. "IADVERTISEMENTt's bomb-proof, bullet-proof and earthquake-proof," said the guide. "Aye," chipped in the man from Banff, "but no' fool-proof." 

Last week Alex Salmond's opponents were indeed taken for fools. They responded to his call for a "national conversation" on Scotland's future with near-hysteria. 

How dare this man try to rip Scotland from the UK, they cried. Half of them acted like Corporal Jones running around shouting "don't panic", while the others made like Private Fraser and moaned "we're doomed". They completely failed to recognise the gap between what the SNP stands for and its actual function in Scottish politics. 

The SNP may style itself the independence party but that is misleading. In reality the SNP is the party that drives forward devolution. History will judge Salmond not as a rabid independenista, but as a devolutionist par excellence. 

It was Salmond who cajoled the Nationalists into embracing devolution in the 1990s on the grounds that "a slice of breid is better than nae loaf". This year he led the SNP into power despite having absolutely no guarantee of being able to deliver a referendum on independence - a scenario unthinkable in Nationalist circles just a year ago. Last week he went one step further, proposing a multi-choice referendum that everyone's granny knows would result in a defeat for independence and victory for 'Devolution Max'. 

Salmond has done all this with skill and subtlety, convincing the SNP's credulous diehards that he hasn't sold out on the glorious prize of full independence. It has been an impressive feat of political leadership. 

This is the real function of the SNP in Scottish politics. The devolution engine is undoubtedly powered by SNP petrol. The definitive Nationalist slogan isn't the 1970s rallying cry, "it's Scotland's oil". Nor is it the mantra from the Holyrood election last May, "it's time". The defining slogan is the one from the mid-1990s: "SNP: The Power For Change". 

It's now clear why Salmond chose to go it alone as a minority government in May rather than cobble together a coalition with the Lib Dems. A coalition deal would have necessitated messy compromises on independence that would have been hard to sell to the SNP membership. 

This way, Salmond gets to dress up his constitutional plans with the rhetoric of national freedom - last week's white paper had on its second page the famous quote from Irish nationalist Charles Stewart Parnell that "no man has a right to fix the boundary of the march of a nation". Yet Salmond knows the likely outcome will fall some way short of the ultimate prize. 

Salmond once explained to me why he couldn't commit the SNP wholeheartedly to a 'more powers' campaign. The party, he said, had to "keep its eyes fixed on the summit" of independence, or risk sliding down the hill. For a gradualist like Salmond, whose core aim is simply to advance the Scottish interest, the fact that the summit remains elusive is not really a problem. 

So far, so good for the First Minister. Last week's launch of a "national conversation" may well result in a referendum that will be a watershed moment in Scottish history. Constitutional change is once again at the heart of Scottish political debate. But I wonder if Salmond has made one strategic error that he will come to regret. 

He has decided the SNP should keep out of the discussion on what should constitute the 'more powers' option for Scotland's future. The First Minister says it's up to the opposition parties to get together and decide which responsibilities they would like to see transferred from Westminster to Holyrood. 

There is an obvious rationale for this. In any future referendum the SNP would of course be arguing the case for independence. It could hardly argue for two options. But come referendum day it will be the 'more powers' camp that will be able to present itself as the authentic voice of the Scottish people, offering a national consensus forged through discussion and compromise. It will be able to offer an option that has the backing of a rainbow of political opinion plus the input of the business community, the churches, the unions and Scottish civic society. 

To stand apart from this process, as Salmond proposes, will make the SNP look like a minority sect, not a party in the mainstream of Scottish opinion. Maybe that is the price the SNP has to pay to preserve its ideological coherence. But the consequence will be that the Nationalists will not be seen as the architects of Scotland's new constitutional settlement if, as expected, a referendum produces a win for 'Devolution Max'. Salmond will have set the process rolling, only to see it gather its own momentum and roll out of his control. 

First things first. It's now up to Scotland's opposition leaders to accept the challenge Salmond has set them and start talking to each other. They should see this as an opportunity to give themselves a relevance they would otherwise lack in an SNP-controlled Scotland. Exactly how they will go about this process is currently unclear. But the offer is a good one. It may actually turn out to be an over-generous offer from a Nationalist point of view. But, hey, no political strategy is fool-proof.
