GORDON Brown, true son of the manse, clearly has a thing about pulpits. When he invited Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, to Britain to make a speech, the venue the Chancellor chose was his father's old kirk, St Brycedale's in Kirkcaldy. Last year Brown issued the same invitation to Mervyn King, governor of the Bank of England. The two economists were placed in the pulpit, their fiscal lessons delivered to the congregation like holy scripture.
Inevitably, the two best speeches in Brown's political career were also delivered from pulpits. The first was his moving tribute at the funeral of Donald Dewar at Glasgow Cathedral in October 2000, when he talked about his friend's "unique bond of trADVERTISEMENTust with the people". The second was his eulogy at the funeral of Robin Cook in St Giles Cathedral in August 2005, when he declared that Cook's life was "a standing reproach to those who say that power corrupts people's beliefs". 

I was among the mourners on both occasions and I was struck by the ease with which Brown adopted the persona of the pastor in the pulpit. He was entirely comfortable with the role - a sermoniser, imparting wisdom and instruction, justifying his utterances with the aid of ancient texts, standing over a silent and attentive congregation. It suited him just fine. 

This is just one of the reasons Brown's religiosity makes me uneasy, and why I think he faces an uphill battle to win the hearts of the British people when he becomes prime minister this week. 

In an excellent profile elsewhere in this paper today, my colleague Tom Brown describes the religious upbringing that shaped Gordon Brown and made him the most impressive Scottish political figure of our age. He mentions the moment last September when Brown told an audience: "I came into politics out of faith. Faith in people and their potential." There was a pause between the two sentences. Faith was clearly intended to be understood in both senses of the word. 

This perfectly sums up Brown's problem. He is driven by two overlapping belief systems - a belief in the redemptive power of religious faith and a belief of the moral righteousness of the Labour party. Neither of these are what people want to hear in a secular Britain that is sceptical of ideology and has come to distrust evangelism in any form. 

It doesn't help Brown that his predecessor is a man who does not wear his faith lightly, and whose last act as Prime Minister is likely to be a visit to the Pope. Rightly or wrongly, Tony Blair's own belief system is now held partly to blame for the way in which he took his country to war in Iraq. 

Again and again in explaining his actions, Blair has used the language of personal belief and moral righteousness. The public have had their fill of it, regardless of whether it was sincere or cynical. Thanks to Blair, any suggestion of religious conviction in a political leader will now be read by the country as sanctimoniousness. 

Politicians are entitled to their beliefs, but politics itself should be a secular business. I remember talking to an extremely agitated Donald Dewar when the Scottish Parliament was in the process of deciding how to organise its day-to-day business. Dewar was outraged at a move to begin every parliamentary day with prayers, as at Westminster. It was to Dewar's immense satisfaction that the attempt failed. 

Of course, Christian socialism has an honourable legacy. In the DNA of the Labour party are many strands of religious thought - stern Methodism from the Welsh valleys; the Temperance movement of the early 20th century; the Presbyterian sense of moral duty; Latin American liberation theology. 

But Britain doesn't want a prime minister whose fundamental driving force is faith, whether in a supernatural power or a political creed. The certainty that such faith brings now makes people uncomfortable. What is valued is a very different kind of conviction politics to the one that produced Gordon Brown. 

A burning desire for social justice? These days people prefer "fairness". Class solidarity? How does that work, when the vast majority of working Britons are, by any honest assessment, middle class? 

In their place are less lofty values - enlightened self-interest; environmental self-preservation; social cohesion; prosperity; efficiency. Some may lament this shift, but who can convincingly deny it? 

Brown knows all this only too well. Seldom has a politician coming into his inheritance had so long to assess the task ahead and to delineate his strategy to win the public's trust. Brown's ambition is not to become prime minister on Wednesday but to retain the title at the next General Election in 2009. 

We are told that the coming weeks will show how much thought he has put into reshaping Labour party politics into a form relevant to the 21st century - particularly in the role of the state. It promises to be radical and historic and impressive. 

But the problem at the heart of Brown's premiership will remain. There will always be tension between this new politics and his pulpit instincts. Brown can accurately sense what people now look for in their political leaders, but he has enough self-knowledge to understand he is simply not that kind of man. 

David Cameron's jibe, that Brown is an analogue politician in a digital age, is one that works on all too many levels. There is a mismatch between our new prime minister and the country he must now govern. That is his biggest challenge, and I for one am unconvinced he can carry it off.
