The economy is in crisis, and we are so relieved that the Senate has finally gone to work debating the critical stimulus plan and ... 

S
Oh, dear Lord. John McCain is making a speech about earmarks. 

“... $188,000 for the Lobster Institute, which includes a lobster cam at the bottom of the ocean that so far we haven’t been able to work!”

Earmarks, you will remember, are those frequently porky little bits of appropriations for specific projects that legislators like to stick into budgets. During the presidential race, McCain gave the definite impression that earmarks were a threat to the nation’s well-being — second only to radical Islamic fundamentalism.

And although McCain lost the election (by a lot, really), Barack Obama still made a point of saying that there would be no earmarks in the stimulus bill.

Which there are not. Nor is there anything for the Lobster Institute. But the old stories are always the best stories. Anyway, we’re talking government spending, so there must be something nefarious somewhere. 

“You don’t have to call it an earmark and it doesn’t have to be technically an earmark, but ... that’s certainly their effect,” McCain said darkly.

The Republicans have been doing an extremely thorough job of making this American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (stimulus bill to its friends) sound like a wasteful ball of lobster cameras. Even its authors now seem a little embarrassed. “It may not be perfect, but it’s pretty good,” said Max Baucus, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, defensively.

Come on, people. Let’s give the stimulus some love. What’s not to like? That it’s messy? My desk is messy. Everything Congress ever touches is messy. It’s true that you could produce a much tidier stimulus plan with a few big, whopping tax cuts. But that could only conceivably work if people went right out and spent the money. Unfortunately, recent history suggests that they are more likely to stick it in a pillow that they can hug while lying in a fetal position and listening to the evening news.

It is also true that some of the bill’s priorities, like increased aid to low-income college students, are more useful than stimulative. But who wants to rail against Pell Grants? You wind up sounding like Kay Bailey Hutchison on “Meet the Press,” complaining obliquely about “nice spending, but not necessary right now.”

So the opponents focus on things with names that sound frivolous or funny. This is an old game that works for almost any form of human communication. Let me explain with a story. When I was beginning my career as a reporter, I once covered a shooting in which the victim was gunned down while playing an arcade video game. This was so long ago that the game in question was Pong.

It was not a very interesting crime, and under normal circumstances it would have vanished in the daily ebb and flow of New York City police reports. However, the shooter made the terrible mistake of including a colorful detail, and he became the Pong Slayer, whose every court appearance merited additional coverage.

The Republicans’ real objection is that the Democrats want to grow the size of government. But they’re playing Pong. This bill has money to fix a school swimming pool in Meriden, Conn.! What kind of priority is that? There’s millions to re-seed the National Mall!

By now, the public has gotten the idea that it’s all a big waste, something the Communicator in the Oval Office has not been very good at contradicting. It’s time for a presidential address to the nation, with charts and perhaps a little illustration of California dropping off into the ocean.

Whenever the Republicans bring up anything in the stimulus bill that sounds a little weird, the Democrats have been pathetically eager to throw in the towel. Witness the Senate’s defeat of $246 million in tax breaks for Hollywood studios, which might not have sounded so silly if you were a college student whose father is a cameraman.

At the insistence of the White House, the Democrats eliminated $200 million to expand federal assistance to states that want to provide family-planning services to poor women. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the money would eventually save about $400 million by cutting unwanted pregnancies. But it became a big rallying point for social conservatives. (“Won’t fewer people mean fewer taxpayers?” demanded columnist Cal Thomas.) So goodbye family planning. 

The $200 million to fix up the National Mall was tossed out in the House. The much-decried money for disaster insurance for the honeybee industry, which is already the subject of snippy T-shirts, never existed, according to the Senate Appropriations Committee. Or if it did, it’s been whisked away and buried under the floorboards. 

If you’re walking around and happen to see a very large but very battered stimulus bill hobbling by, give it a pat on the back. It’s been Ponged within an inch of its life. 

