Just before she was confirmed as secretary of state, Hillary Clinton bid adieu to her New York constituents and her eight-year career as a U.S. senator. “I’ve had a lot of fun,” she said in a farewell speech. “Eight state fairs, 45 parades, 62 counties, more than 4,600 events across the state.”

A short list, yet the answer to many questions. Like why, in a state chock-full of distinguished residents, it was so hard to scrounge up Hillary’s replacement. 

Caroline Kennedy, who seemed to have pretty much locked up the seat, told Gov. David Paterson this week that she wanted out, citing mysterious personal reasons. New York Democrats were a little resentful, particularly since for most of them there were few reasons — up to and including having been deceased for several weeks — that are grave enough to warrant passing up a free Senate seat.

Respectful of the longstanding state tradition that there is no situation so bad that it can’t be made worse, Paterson’s office followed up by sliming Kennedy.

Even before the messy denouement, there were worrisome signs that Kennedy was just not the kind of person who would have fun doing 4,600 events across the state. A well-adjusted U.S. senator needs to combine a sincere interest in public policy with a joyful acceptance of the need to demean oneself while begging for votes and donations. But Caroline only seemed really enthusiastic about the first bit.

The state’s senior senator, Chuck Schumer, on the other hand, believes that doing something silly is a way to reassure voters that he doesn’t think he’s better than they are. One of his fondest memories is competing in a sausage-eating contest in Cheektowaga. His staff has a rule requiring aides to intervene if it looks as if their man is about to sing, dance or put on a strange hat.

Clinton had a zest for the endless campaign, too, although the fact that she was keeping count of the number of appearances suggests that even she perceived a very deep downside to the job.

On Friday in Albany, Governor Paterson introduced Kirsten Gillibrand, a 42-year-old second-term member of Congress, as the new junior senator from New York. One look and you could see that this was a woman who would like nothing more than to march in 45 parades. She thanked everybody on the planet and introduced her 8-month-old son who was, she explained happily, “a good eater and a good sleeper.” Little Henry, we have since learned, was born shortly after Gillibrand spent 13 hours in the House of Representatives, voting on the farm bill and sitting through an endless hearing of the Armed Services Committee, where she successfully offered an amendment before moving on to the delivery room.

Despite Gillibrand’s giddy good cheer, there was a sense of uneasiness in the air at the press conference. And it had nothing to do with the fact that while the new senator was being unveiled, the New York State Senate’s recently retired majority leader was being indicted for political corruption. Really, Albany takes stuff like that in stride. 

Gillibrand is conservative by New York Democratic standards, and there were rumblings of revolt in the party’s extremely large liberal wing. “A very bad choice,” said Representative Carolyn McCarthy of Long Island, a gun control advocate who was incensed by Gillibrand’s perfect N.R.A. voting record.

The way a legislator votes is sort of, um, significant. Gillibrand’s current House district is conservative, but the state isn’t — particularly the Democratic part. 

However, it seems as if the new senator’s politics are evolving at a rate previously seen only in science-fiction movies. She’s developed a hitherto unnoticed belief in gay marriage. At her press conference, she expressed an interest in working on one of McCarthy’s gun control bills. She has an appointment to meet in Harlem with Al Sharpton. 

It feels as if it’s time for the Senate to finish swearing-in new faces and move on to ... bills. Let’s take what we’ve got and wait and see. 

While the governor of Illinois is having his impeachment trial, his selection for the Senate, Roland Burris, is now happily ensconced in Fred Thompson’s old office. You will remember that in the presidential race, Thompson entered in a blaze of glory but wound up looking extremely silly. Perhaps Burris, who entered Washington on a wave of hilarity, will turn out to be a statesman. 

Stranger things have happened. After all, we live in a world in which the former president of France was hospitalized this week after an attack by his “clinically depressed” Maltese.

We’re in for the long haul. If you’re a New Yorker with a parade or sausage-eating contest coming up, be sure to invite Senator Gillibrand. Meanwhile, hope for the best. And watch out for small, bipolar dogs. 

