It’s 8 p.m., American TV viewers, so you know it’s time for: Who Wants to Be a Secretary of Commerce?

Twenty eager contenders arrived last month in Coral Gables, Fla., at an exclusive chateau with a defaulted mortgage, ready to compete for the dream job of a lifetime. At the end of each episode, their host, Joe Biden, distributes the coveted Roses of Change, inviting all but one contestant to continue on for another week.

And now, only five remain. They have come from around the nation. People like you and me, only more interested in promoting market compliance.

People like Caroline Kennedy, a mom from Manhattan hoping to find a career that will combine her desire to perform public service at the highest levels with her yen for total anonymity. 

Kennedy became the favorite after last week’s show, when she was the only contestant who knew that the pact under which the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Industry and Security regulates the export of solar cells is known as the Wassenaar Arrangement.

Senator John Kerry, who answered “The Peace of Westphalia,” was sent home. Vice President Biden, who has broken into tears each time he is forced to withhold a rose from a hopeful contestant, sobbed uncontrollably as Kerry recalled how, when he was a child, his grandfather had told him that if he worked hard, one day he might grow up to enforce patent law for the entire nation. 

The contestants have grown close to one another over the long weeks of competition. Who could forget the slumber party when Christopher Dodd confessed to the other chateau guests that after all this time as chairman of the Senate banking committee, he still didn’t exactly understand what a toxic asset was? Or the night when Lindsey Graham collapsed from stress after John McCain and Joe Lieberman demanded that he say which of them was his real best friend?

Who Wants to Be a Secretary of Commerce? has proved to be one of the administration’s most popular TV contests. Its ratings have been second only to Survivor: Department of Health, Education and Human Services. The nation gave its heart to the spunky Barbara Mikulski and wept when John Edwards beat her in a fire-starting contest to win the final challenge.

The only slightly less popular So You Think You Can Run the Labor Department riveted the nation when, in a shocking surprise ending, Dennis Kucinich beat out the fan favorite, Chris Matthews, with a crowd-pleasing performance in which Dennis and stunning wife Elizabeth sang “The Ballad of Joe Hill” while dancing the Macarena.

The idea of filling the cabinet via TV games came to President Obama when Senator Judd Gregg changed his mind about becoming secretary of commerce. Gregg lost interest after discovering, late in the day, that he was a Republican and Obama was a Democrat. Instantly, dozens of other senators who were bored working in a place where everything important is decided by the three moderate Republicans, volunteered for the job. 

The new system helped reduce hard feelings, increase transparency and halved the unemployment rate in the critical reality-show sector. It worked out so well, in fact, that Obama has begun using it for sub-cabinet posts as well. Keep an eye out for the upcoming The Apprentice: Chief Performance Officer, in which Mitt Romney will be challenged to help Arnold Schwarzenegger save the California economy with a chain of lemonade stands in Los Angeles along Rodeo Drive. 

In tonight’s episode of Who Wants to Be a Secretary of Commerce?, attention turns to the Republicans. Graham, McCain and Rudy Giuliani will face off in a series of events that include seeing who can stand on one foot in a rainstorm for the longest time and delivering census forms to a public housing development.

The winner will join Kennedy and dark-horse contender David Petraeus in the Final Three. Each will enjoy a dream dinner in a glamorous Tampa restaurant, during which Biden will ask them whether their role model in the job would be Herbert Hoover, Harry Hopkins or Philip Klutznick. 

Meanwhile, in other TV news, NBC has announced its midseason programming will be led off with “The Women From Maine” in which Senators Olympia Snowe and Susan Collins play moderate Republican witches who try to make the world a better and more fiscally responsible place. Harry Reid will co-star as their befuddled landlord who thinks his tenants are unemployed actresses trying to break into the Portland theater business. Arlen Specter will play Squeaky, their impish helper. 

