Notes from the Age of Obama:


Members of the still-not-in-power administration traveled to the Capitol this week to allow Senate Democrats to complain about the upcoming stimulus package. The Obama-ites were extremely eager to listen. After all, senators have feelings, too.

“These folks are not potted plants,” said the senior adviser David Axelrod.

Already we have a big break with the past. The Bush White House so totally regarded senators as potted plants that it was a wonder that senior aides didn’t attempt to water them. Democrats believed that Dick Cheney had a large chart in which legislators were identified by which type of household foliage they most resembled. (Harry Reid was a ficus.) But no more. 

Barack Obama is going to change the tone of Washington politics. He promised. Of course George W. Bush promised that, too. But once his administration ran into resistance in Congress, the Era of Good Feeling was out the door and the potted-plant index was in. (John Kerry was a begonia.)

The endless transition period is giving us a little clearer picture of how the next president is going to govern. He is going to be civil, and if somebody forgets to tell the chairman of the intelligence committee who the next C.I.A. director is going to be, he will apologize. He does not want to let side issues get in the way of his big priorities, whether said issue is as large as the Gaza crisis (only one president at a time) or as small as Roland Burris, the successor to Obama’s Senate seat who was chosen by the eminently impeachable governor of Illinois.

“We have an economy on the ropes; we need to move forward,” said Dick Durbin, the senior senator from Illinois when — after some pressure from the White House — he and Reid, the majority leader, reversed course and appeared ready to eventually welcome Burris into the fold. 

We are rooting for Burris to make it into office, since any Roland who names his kids Roland II and Rolanda is bound to provide a welcome diversion in the gloomy months ahead. And if the Obama administration ever goes to the Dark Side, we have definitely got an early front-runner for their philodendron designation. 

But in all deference to Durbin, we’ve got to put an end to people banning topics of conversation on the grounds that we are living in a time of financial peril. Last month, the artistic director of a Manhattan theater company suggested to The Times’s Patrick Healy that it was inappropriate to ask him to discuss sudden changes in the “Pal Joey” cast when “the entire world economy is falling apart.” Next thing you know, we’ll be barred from saying anything negative about the Super Bowl in deference to the unemployment rate. 

We also really need to clarify the limits to proper political civility. Everyone agrees that even if Mitch McConnell does resemble a large, root-bound sansevieria trifasciata, the Democrats will keep it to themselves. But there’s such a thing as getting carried away with bipartisanship.

Obama has made no secret that he wants whopping Republican support for his stimulus plan to send a message to the country that we are all on the same page when it comes to fixing the economy. That’s apparently the impetus for all the business tax cuts that appeared in the mix this week. And at a Senate confirmation hearing, Tom Daschle, the secretary of health and human services nominee, assured Republicans that they were right in believing the administration wanted to craft a health care policy that was not “a 51-vote solution, but rather a 70-, 80- or a 90-vote solution.” 

There are some things on which parties can work together very nicely. For instance, it was very clear from the committee hearing that nobody in the Senate supports childhood obesity and that Daschle, a popular former majority leader, would be confirmed even if he had showed up to testify in the nude. Maybe, if everybody in the House tries very hard to get along, the chamber will not find it impossible to reach accord on a resolution commemorating Mother’s Day, as happened last year.

But there are some things about which the two parties are supposed to disagree. During the presidential campaign, Obama talked constantly about creating a national health insurance program while John McCain said the government should just give people tax breaks for buying their own policies. Obama won, and the Democrats’ job now is to figure out how to make sure the current economic crisis is solved in a way that allows him to deliver on his promise to do something big and ambitious about health care — and his other signature issue, energy/global warming. The Republicans’ job is to try to limit the big spending to tax cuts and short-term building projects. If the final bill passes by 80 or 90 votes, it’s probably going to be because it’s a watered-down mess.

Which is the sort of thing that nobody wants. Unless they live in a pot. 
