“My state, the state of Illinois, has gone through quite a beating since our governor was arrested,” said Senator Dick Durbin on Wednesday. Given the long roll call of gubernatorial incarcerations there, this could well be the unofficial state motto. 


The topic was the endlessly developing story of who is going to sit in Barack Obama’s former Senate seat. Was the selection of Roland Burris by the Rogue Governor Rod Blagojevich “tainted,” in the words of the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, or “what the Lord has ordained,” in the words of Burris? 

Reid was heavy of heart. A new Democratic president — from Illinois! — was about to be sworn in. But instead of celebrations, the days were devoted to Burris developments. It was ruining everything. Durbin could not even hold a party without worrying about what he would do if Burris crashed it. 

On Tuesday, when Obama was warning about “trillion-dollar deficits,” it was Burris, standing in a puddle outside the Capitol, who created an absolute media riot, a collision of cameras of Anna-Nicole-Smith-autopsy proportions. He then made his way to the office of the secretary of the Senate, a veritable walking clog of tape recorders. 

There, as Reid explained later, Burris had “an extremely gracious meeting” that ended with a gracious eviction.

Last week, the majority leader had sternly decreed that nobody selected by Blagojevich was ever going to be seated in the Senate. But his spirit seems broken. Clearly, he had underestimated Burris’s determination. And the entire debate has been complicated by arguments that the seat should go to someone who, like Burris, is an African-American. You know you’re having a bad week when you’re being called a racist by Rush Limbaugh. (“Remember, all these great segregationists of the past are Democrats.”)

By midweek, Reid was restricting himself to arguing that at least for the time being, Burris cannot be seated because the Illinois secretary of state has refused to sign off on the paperwork. That signature was a tradition since 1884! “People ask a lot of times why we have to do things procedurally in the Senate,” he said, arguing for Rules Committee hearings. “It’s because we’re the Senate.”

And how do we feel about this matter, people? According to federal prosecutors, Blagojevich only decided to appoint Burris after the governor failed in earlier attempts to auction the seat off. But nobody has accused Burris of being one of the bidders. In fact, if we were making a list of the pros and cons of putting this guy in the Senate, “noncorrupt” would be No. 1 on the plus side.

On the negative side, you might want to include the fact that Burris has already constructed a mausoleum for himself that is topped by Illinois’s state seal and the legend “Trail Blazer.” Those are followed by a list of his historic firsts, ranging from the impressive (first African-American elected to a statewide office in Illinois) to some stuff you would really try to refrain from bragging about except at parties in which there had been a great deal of drinking (first African-American exchange student from Southern Illinois University to Hamburg). There also is a sidebar granite slab for “Other Major Accomplishments.” 

As the mausoleum illustrates, even in an occupation in which oversized egos are practically a career requirement, Burris can be a little alarming. The fact that he made Illinois history by being elected state comptroller in 1979 is something you would feel like admiring a lot more if Burris had not told The Associated Press in 2008: “I’d say if there hadn’t been a Roland Burris, that there would not have been a Carol Braun or a Barack Obama.”

Legally, the secretary-of-state-signature argument seems kind of shaky. You may be stunned to learn that it does not appear to be the true basis of Democrats’ objections. The party wants somebody who can win election to a full term in 2010. At 71, Burris has been out of office for 14 years, and although he had successful races for comptroller and attorney general, he lost bids to become a senator, the mayor of Chicago and governor (three times). 

Burris told CNN that he had originally been open to the idea of agreeing to serve the two years and retire but that his “friends and supporters” had protested.

So where does that leave us? To summarize — 

Pros:

1) Not corrupt.

2) Rod Blagojevich is smarter than he looks.

3) Make Rush Limbaugh stop calling Harry Reid a racist.

Cons:

1) Mausoleum syndrome.

2) Secretary of state signature thing.

3) Excessive reliance on the political advice of loved ones.

Personally, I say give the guy the seat. Worst-case scenario, Illinois gets an overly self-involved lawmaker who seems, at this point in his life, to have a tendency to say things that sound somewhat silly. If that was a disqualification, the Senate could never meet a quorum call again. 

