With all the stories about people doing happy dances in the street and smiling on the subways after Barack Obama won, we have overlooked the dark side of the postelection mood.

I am sorry to say that there have been some instances of gloating winners and sore losers, going even beyond the moment when Barney the White House dog bit a Reuters reporter.

For instance, there was the matter of Senator Lindsey Graham. In the fervor of the final week of the campaign, Graham basically promised to drown himself if Barack Obama took North Carolina. When I wrote that we did not really expect Graham to follow through, a number of readers took exception.

“A promise is a promise,” wrote John Kaseley of Bonita Springs, Fla.

“Can’t we at least throw him in the lake?” asked someone else. 

There are two problems with this attitude. First of all, you cannot be angry with Republicans for supporting the Republican presidential candidate. It’s like getting angry at squirrels for climbing trees. Second, and far more important, Graham is not actually going to drown himself, so you might as well get points for urging him to stay out of the water. 

In the good old days, victorious politicians did not have to worry about currying good will. Their defeated opponents were sent to work out their issues in the Libyan salt mines. That doesn’t happen much anymore, so let’s try to be gracious.

Sure, it was an intense campaign. Of course, regrettable things were said in the heat of the moment. My mother and my sister Patti, for instance, had an argument about the prospects of the local Republican congressman that culminated in my mother betting her house that he would be re-elected. But when he lost, Patti generously announced that she had decided to let Mom stay in residence. I think this is the spirit we should all be trying to emulate.

Still, there is a fine line between good sportsmanship and being played for a sucker. I am thinking of McCain’s other BFF, Senator Joseph Lieberman, who not only endorsed the Republican ticket and spoke at the Republican convention but also said, in the course of the campaign, that unlike McCain, Obama did not always put his country first. Since Lieberman is part of the Senate Democratic caucus, all this is not normal like squirrels climbing trees. It’s more like squirrels breaking into your house and setting fire to the sofa. 

On the other hand, the most Lieberman accomplished with months and months of nonstop campaigning was to push McCain support in his home state of Connecticut to 38 percent. Treachery is bad, but inept treachery is easier to get over. Since Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, needs the vote, you could understand him telling Lieberman that he’s still welcome.

Lieberman, however, apparently is demanding that he also be allowed to keep his chairmanship of the homeland security committee. CNN reported that he turned down appointments to less prestigious posts and went home to mull his options. I know what you’re wondering, but Lieberman did not promise to drown himself if Connecticut failed to go for John McCain. 

The Republicans are being way more nasty to Sarah Palin than the Democrats are to Lieberman. They’ve been portraying her as both a shopaholic and a woman who walks around in nothing but a bath towel, a hillbilly who’s also a prima donna. The leakathon climaxed this week when Fox News’s Carl Cameron announced that Palin did not know that Africa was a continent.

Palin says this is untrue. But the worst part is that if these people get any meaner, we’re going to wind up feeling sorry for her. This is not something we are looking forward to, Republicans, and we will resent you for it.

Another bad role model on the postelection manners front is the House minority leader, John Boehner, who called Rahm Emanuel, Obama’s future White House chief of staff, “an ironic choice for a president-elect who has promised to change Washington, make politics more civil and govern from the center.”

The only possible argument for this kind of language was that it was actually not all that inaccurate. 

Still, nobody should want to be first in line to trash an administration that doesn’t even exist yet. Would it have killed Boehner to say something conciliatory? Something like: “It will be good to see a familiar face in the new White House, and I want Rahm to know that I am not mad anymore about the time he bit me on the ankle.” 

Setting a much better example, Senator Graham called Emanuel “a wise choice” who “understands the need to work together.” Of course, Graham is undoubtedly hoping that if he’s nice enough, the Democrats will forget about you-know-what. 

