Crises abound in our troubled world, but think positive. At least it appears that peace has come to the Democratic Party.

The folks at the top of the food chain were the very picture of good fellowship.

“It couldn’t have gone better.” — Bill Burton, Obama spokesman.

“From what they told us, it was what they had in mind all along.” — Philippe Reines, Clinton spokesman.

Problem? There was a problem?

Seriously — good work, Democrats. There is no greater achievement than the nonviolent resolution of differences, and we’ll take it on whatever level we can get it. Organizing a harmonious convention is not exactly a new Middle East roadmap. But like all settlements between enemy forces, it required leaders who were willing to forego the temptation to appear tough at all times, and followers prepared to get over it, whatever historical wound “it” happens to represent. For an example of a situation in which both these factors are AWOL, see the current conflict in Georgia.

On its face, the Hillary resolution appears pretty obvious. The woman got more than 1,900 delegates, for heaven’s sake. If she wants to be nominated, she’s going to be nominated.

But the last thing the Obamaites needed was a long spectacle on national television in which one state after another stood up, gave a plug for its tourist attractions, and then cast a divided vote, while the delegate lead switched back and forth until Barack won. And Obama had some power — if not to stop Clinton, at least to make her look like a sore loser who was trying to torpedo the party’s chances in November. 

Then — happy ending! Barack refrained from flexing his muscles, although any man condemned to a three-month-long steel cage match with John McCain must have been tempted to go for the mindless macho route.

Hillary, for her part, will not see her historic achievement recorded in the convention records. The details aren’t public, but it seems likely that after her name is put in nomination, even before the first roll call, she’ll release her delegates and urge them to vote for Obama. Her most ardent supporters will still get to cast their votes for their heroine. (The word “catharsis” comes up frequently in these discussions.) But most of her delegates, including Clinton herself, would switch over to Barack.

This is no tiny thing to give up. Clinton is only the third woman to ever compete in the major party primaries. Shirley Chisholm got 152 delegates in 1972, and Margaret Chase Smith got 27 in 1964. Chisholm fought the good fight, but none of the male candidates ever considered her a serious threat. Smith, an extraordinary senator from Maine who was the first person in Congress with the spine to stand up to Joe McCarthy, made the Republicans nervous when she entered the New Hampshire primary. But she seemed unsure of exactly how a woman was supposed to run for president, and soon resorted to passing out muffins on her campaign stops.

And now Hillary Clinton — 1,920 delegates by The Times’ final count. This is an extraordinary breakthrough. And yet, when the delegates actually call out their votes in Denver, it’s likely that the numbers will look more like Margaret Chase Smith redux.

“We know what we’ve achieved,” Clinton has been telling her backers.

Everybody is not going to be appeased. PUMA, or People United Means Action, is an excellent example of the Ossetia branch of the Hillary camp. Darragh Murphy, the PUMA spokeswoman, said that while her members are extremely happy about the agreement, it will have no effect whatsoever on their plans for perpetual resistance. Unless their state allows write-ins, she said, most PUMA members will stay home or vote for John McCain in November to protest the way Democratic leaders “allowed the primary campaign to go forward with the sexism in the media going unchecked by the party, along with the disenfranchisement of Florida and Michigan, and the shenanigans in Iowa and Texas in the caucuses.” 

Yes, down in the grass-roots, there are still some sullen stalks. But the vast majority of Hillaryites seem prepared to accept the new accord as an indication that their heroine will get the proper respect. The tanks have turned around. 

Those Democrats sure do know how to work together. Maybe next they’ll be able to figure out how to keep their primaries from starting around Christmas. 
