As we slink off into the long holiday weekend, let’s see if we can tout up the lessons learned from Wesleygate.

Clark, who has been available for a vice-presidential nomination for so long that his shelf-life sticker is expiring, actually said that the year McCain once spent running an aviation squadron in Florida did not amount to serious executive experience. “He hasn’t been there and ordered the bombs to fall,” Clark told CBS’s Bob Schieffer energetically. “He hasn’t seen what it’s like when diplomats come in and say: ‘I don’t know whether we’re going to be able to get this point through or not — do you want to take this risk?’ ”

A picky observer might have a few quibbles here. Do wartime squadron commanders typically receive reports from diplomats? Also, is this the best possible line of attack for an Obama supporter to take, when Barack’s only big claim to executive leadership was being a community organizer? Not generally a job that involves ordering bombs to fall.

Clark was careful to say that he considered McCain a hero for his P.O.W. suffering and that he honored his service. This is a Democratic mantra that must preface every single mention of the presumptive Republican nominee. For instance: “We honor Senator McCain’s service. (Pause) His plan for the budget looks as if it was worked out by an elementary school math class in crayon.”

When Schieffer pointed out that Obama had neither run a squadron nor “ridden in a fighter plane and gotten shot down,” the correct response was: “No, and he honors Senator McCain’s service.” But instead, Clark blurted out: “Well, I don’t think that riding in a fighter plane and getting shot down is a qualification to be president.”

Here we see a violation of the first rule of the political talking head: Speak softly when cable TV hosts are entering a summer slow-news week.

Nevertheless, what Clark said was obviously true. Many McCain backers feel that his endurance as a prisoner of war revealed qualities important in a commander in chief. But I have never heard anybody argue that the getting shot down part, was, in and of itself, a sign of presidential leadership.

The responses from the right ranged from “smear ... libel ... beyond the pale” (Karl Rove) to a Republican commentator on Fox claiming that the Obama-ites were saying “being shot at is not military service.” 

McCain’s reaction suggested he’s already run out of material for heated but meaningless controversies. First, he said talk like that “doesn’t reduce the price of a gallon of gas by one penny.” Strategically, this was a waste of a good rhetorical device. Someday a random political disaster is going to strike McCainland. Then, the senator is going to say that you can talk about (fill in terrible embarrassment) all you want, but it will not bring the price of gas down a single penny. And everybody will point out that he already said that about Wesley Clark.

Later, McCain ratcheted up and called on Obama to fire Clark. Actually, the term was “cut him loose” since Clark does not have a position from which to be fired. There was a time when this might have had some traction, but we’ve had so many calls for so many people to be fired lately that it’s gotten ho-hum. We yearn for the good old days when people saved proposals of employment termination for larger errors, like, say, mismanaging an entire war, or subverting the Constitution.

Obama failed to get truly engaged in the back and forth. It was, as he said in his patriotism speech, one of those fights “rooted in the cultural wars of the 1960s — in arguments that go back 40 years or more.” (Translation: Dudes, this all happened when I was six.)

Americans of all ages tend to both respect military service and ignore it when picking a president. In the last four elections, they’ve rejected the guys who went to war and elected the draft, er, nonembracers. McCain presumably understands this. When Bob Dole, a wounded veteran, announced his candidacy in 1996, McCain backed Phil Gramm, a Texas senator who had piled up a series of draft deferments that made Bill Clinton look like Nathan Hale.

About those lessons: McCain’s campaign has announced a staff reorganization, so perhaps he realizes that he needs better outraged-response material. Wesley Clark has learned that he’s not going to be vice president. And maybe both camps now understand that this is not the year for debates about management experience. The next president isn’t going to have much. It’s O.K. If we cared about management, we’d have stuck with Mitt Romney. 

