Select committees are now an important way in which the Government is held publicly to account by MPs. Much more than adversarial battles in the chamber, committees offer the chance for detailed scrutiny of the work of ministers and of civil servants and other public officials. The main influence of the departmental select committees, celebrating their 30th anniversary this year, is via public evidence-taking sessions, now often televised. These have broadened the public debate. For instance, the Treasury committee’s recent hearings into the banking crisis have focused attention on what went wrong, and why.

Since July 2002, the Prime Minister himself has been questioned for two and a half hours twice a year by the Liaison Committee of committee chairmen.

The influence of committee reports is often indirect because they can, of course, be ignored by governments but, writing in How Parliament Works, Robert Rogers and Rhodri Walters, senior parliamentary clerks, highlight committee influence on government policy over Gulf War syndrome, communications regulation, road sharing and empty homes.

Committees’ powers are limited because they are not involved in legislation and cannot block spending plans. They operate within a Parliament dominated by party loyalties and the battle between the Government and Opposition. That is why comparisons with powerful US congressional committees are wrong because the executive and legislature are separate there.


Above all, committees are constrained by the ambitions of many, if not most, MPs to serve as ministers or on the Shadow frontbench teams. Few MPs have made their names primarily for select committee work: notable exceptions are Tony Wright, of the Public Administration Committee, and Frank Field and Giles (now Lord) Radice in the past.

Chris Mullin often wonders in his widely praised new diaries, A View from the Foothills, whether he had more influence as chairman of the home affairs committee than he did in his two spells as a minister.

The growing size of front benches limits the pool of talented MPs to serve on the 19 departmental select committees (each of 11 to 16 MPs). So with an additional network of regional committees just set up, many MPs have to serve on two committees and separate committees considering legislation. Moreover, select committee work seldom attracts media attention in constituencies, so few MPs feel that they gain from serving.

These factors, rather than alleged laziness, explain the low attendance, although obviously some MPs are more assiduous than others. Most committees have always survived on a hard core of Members to make their impact.

Select committees have existed for hundreds of years to allow more detailed scrutiny of the executive, but the role was dramatically changed by the creation of the departmental system in 1979. An article in the new issue of The Journal of Legislative Studies (by Andrew Hindmoor, Phil Larkin and Andrew Kennon) assesses the influence of the education and skills committee from 1997 until 2005, looking at its influence upon government, Parliament, the media and party debates. They conclude that committees have indirect influence, seldom decisive on their own, but as part of the wider, public debate. But select committees depend upon MPs devoting time to them, rather than being tempted by ministerial red boxes.

