Nick Clegg’s dilemma is that he is an Establishment politician trying to project an anti-Establishment image. Refreshed from his paternity leave, he talks as a committed reformer, of the public sector as well as the political system. 

Yet a background of Westminster, Cambridge and the European Parliament means that Mr Clegg does not look like an insurgent. And by taking up the opposition parties’ right to hold talks with Whitehall permanent secretaries, he wants his team to see themselves, and to be seen, as serious about power. 

At one level, of course, the Liberal Democrats risk being submerged by the economic crisis. Little attention is paid to what Mr Clegg and his team say, apart, of course, from the indefatigable Vince Cable, who has achieved the rare trick of appearing an almost non-partisan sage. Mr Clegg is sensibly treating Mr Cable as part of a double act. 

But a two-party squeeze has only partly happened. The Lib Dems’ poll ratings fluctuate from month to month and vary between pollsters, partly reflecting differences in the ways the polls are conducted. But, if anything, the Lib Dems have crept up to the higher teens as Labour has slipped back and the Tories have not yet returned to their highs of last summer. 


This is part of a wider mood of disillusionment with mainstream politicians (they are all as bad as each other). That has been reflected in a rise in the share of other parties to double figures again in recent polls, as well as the high votes for the British National Party in some local by-elections. 

Hence “none of the above” could do well in the June elections, as they often have in the past (remember the Green boomlet in the 1989 Euro elections and the UKIP surge in 2004). 

But can the Lib Dems benefit? Mr Clegg accepts that extreme, nationalist and xenophobic parties often do well in times of economic trouble, searching for scapegoats and playing an anti-Establishment card. He believes that the Lib Dems can position themselves by showing that they can deliver on the ground in local councils and by taking on the BNP, as they recently did successfully in a street-by-street battle in a council by-election in Newcastle upon Tyne. 

But, at the centre, Mr Clegg wants to break ranks with the Establishment. The Lib Dems can only gain from being bold, as they have sought to be on taxes, welfare and schools. Similarly, now, Mr Clegg has raised the fresh issue of whether directors of failed banks, including non-executives, should be disqualified. 

It is not just narrow populism for taxpayers to demand that such directors face some reckoning because of their serious errors. Mr Clegg is correct that mainstream politicians need to respond to such anger. But, as he has discovered in his 15 months as leader, heading a third party requires as much patience as being the father of a newborn baby. 

