The Conservatives retain a double figure lead in the polls thanks to strong support among private sector workers, according to the latest Populus poll for The Times. 

The poll reveals sharp divisions between public and private sector workers and between men and women. 

The Tories are unchanged since a month ago at 42 per cent, just below their mid-2008 peak, while Labour support seems to have bottomed out at 30 per cent, up two points on early February, at slightly higher levels than last summer. The Liberal Democrats are on 19 per cent, up one 

These figures suggest that any “Obama bounce” after Gordon Brown’s visit to Washington last week was very modest. Some 25 per cent say they feel more positively towards him as a result and 13 per cent less positively, with 63 per cent saying no difference. 

The positive responses come heavily from among Labour voters, with 46 per cent of the latter saying they feel more positive towards Mr Brown, against just 14 per cent of Tory voters. Given the much smaller improvement in Labour’s headline support in the poll, this implies that very few of these voters felt sufficiently more positive about Mr Brown’s visit to say they would vote Labour as a result. 

For this month’s poll, Populus included a separate question on occupation. Some 56 per cent of the 1,504 people interviewed are in either full or part-time work. Of these’ nearly a third, or 18 per cent of the total, are in the public sector, while over two-thirds, 38 per cent of the total, are in the private sector. 

Conservative support is 38 per cent in the public sector, but 45 per cent in the private sector, while Labour’s rating is slightly lower in the public than the private sector, at 26 against 29 per cent. The difference is partly because the Liberal Democrats do much better in the public than the private sector, at 23 against 17 per cent, and employees of the state sector are more inclined to back other parties, notably the Greens. The Tories are ahead amongst NHS and local government workers, while support amongst teachers splits almost evenly between the three main parties. 

On who is trusted most to deal with the economy in the best interests of Britain, Mr Brown and Alistair Darling are ahead of David Cameron and George Osborne among public sector employees by 37 to 28 per cent. But the Tory team is ahead by 39 to 36 per cent in the private sector and is doing significantly better among non-working people (for instance by 45 to 25 per cent among over 65s). 

Overall, the Cameron/Osborne team is now ahead of the Brown/Darling team by 37 to 33 per cent on economic trust, the first time they have been in the lead on this question since the banking crisis erupted last October. 

There is also a marked gender gap with Cameron and Osborne eight points ahead among women, but tied with Labour among men. 

The gender contrast is even more marked on economic optimism, with women 37 points more pessimistic than men on the prospects for them and their families. Overall, economic pessimism may be levelling out. But voters generally believe that people who work in the public sector will not fare as badly as those in the private sector (a 21 point gap). 

Only one in twenty voters have a "great deal of confidence" that the G20 summit of world leaders in three weeks' time will help economic recovery. But well over a half have "a little confidence" that it will help the recession in Britain (56 per cent), or will assist the global economy to recover (64 per cent). 

