Demands for an apology by Gordon Brown for the economic crisis are largely pointless, and self-indulgent. Much more important is the substance of policy, and whether Mr Brown publicly accepts that this is flawed and has to change. 

We have been here before, with Tony Blair over Iraq. The problem of how a leader rebuilds his standing is discussed in a fascinating new book, Dispatches from the War Room, by Stan Greenberg, the leading American pollster and consultant. 

Mr Greenberg was a close adviser to both Bill Clinton and Mr Blair during their rises to power and periods in office, as well as working for Nelson Mandela (a close student of polls and focus groups), Ehud Barak and other leaders. He analyses how they saw their personal missions, and the importance of listening to voters. As interesting is his account of how, and when, they disregarded the polls as when they followed them. 

The book offers several revelations about Mr Blair (for instance, about a faith group which met in the run-up to the 1997 election separate from his political advisers). In a close parallel with now, Mr Greenberg discloses differences among polling advisers, notably with fellow American Mark Penn, before the 2005 election (for more on this spat see www.pollster.com). At its heart was how Mr Blair should deal with his unpopularity after the Iraq war. 

Mr Greenberg believed there was a road back. It was necessary for Mr Blair to acknowledge mistakes, and show some independence from President Bush on climate change, in order to rebuild trust. But Mr Blair remained certain about his course on Iraq, and about his closeness to Mr Bush. 

When asked at a Royal Society of Arts event on Tuesday evening about Mr Brown’s dilemma, Mr Greenberg said it was not about apologising but about openly acknowleding mistakes (as Alistair Darling has this week). Mr Brown has always been reluctant to admit weaknesses for fear of giving ammunition to his opponents. But this attitude is now counter-productive and has undermined his standing with voters. Yes, Mr Brown is correct that this is a global crisis which began in America. 

But there have been obvious home-grown mistakes: some, such as the excessive level of public borrowing before the recession, were discussed at the time, others such as weakenesses in the regulatory system have been largely highlighted in retrospect. Either way, Mr Brown should be less defensive, acknowledging mistakes and stressing his willingness to learn and adapt. It is necessary to move on from the flawed approach of Alan Greenspan, his admired adviser. That, rather than a breast-beating apology, is the crucial first step before Mr Brown can begin to win back support for his ambitious reform and recovery programme.
