The downward spiral continues. The Government has had no choice but to embark on another huge bailout of the banking system, only three months after the first one. That will not make it any easier for Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling to explain and justify to a worried public the fresh multibillion-pound taxpayer commitment. 

Voters have so far been confused by the banking crisis, according to polls and focus groups. They have broadly accepted Mr Brown's argument that the problems started in America and have given him credit for taking necessary and decisive, if unpalatable, action. 

This stoical response may not last. The more that the Government, and so the taxpayer, is drawn into guaranteeing the banking system, the more people will hold Mr Brown responsible for turning things around, and blame him and Labour if this does not happen. 

Politicians can now focus their criticism on bankers for reckless lending and for failing to be open about their losses. Ministers must take care not to fuel an already simmering anti-banker mood because the Government is relying on bankers, albeit not always the same ones, to boost lending to revive the economy. 

The Government has first to answer the question posed yesterday by Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesman: what has happened to the £37 billion that went into the banking system in October? That prompt action saved the banking system from collapse but it was not enough, primarily because the banks have used the initial support to shore up their capital positions, especially in the face of further big losses on earlier lending. Hence, the need for the new aid and guarantees. But will this be enough? 

The second, and linked, challenge arises over what Mr Brown has described as financial isolationism. Nearly a third of lending to British consumers and companies has been by overseas, notably American, banks, many of which have cut back or withdrawn, leaving a hole that is hard for squeezed British banks to fill. 

This partly offsets the politically embarrassing revelations that a very large proportion of loans by British banks have been to overseas borrowers. This downside of financial globalisation explains Mr Brown's constant refrain about closer international co-operation. 

Third, Mr Brown has to show why tens of billions more for the banks are justified when failing retailers and industrial companies are not being bailed out. There will apparently be many more deserving recipients as the recesssion worsens. There is already a backlash against the dominance of the City and finance. Of course, a revival of credit markets and lending is vital for any recovery, and the Government has launched a blizzard of initiatives, on jobs, housing, skills etc to show that it is responding to these wider concerns. 

The Brown bounce has definitely disappeared in the polls, and the Tories have regained a double-figure lead over Labour. They will mount an even stronger challenge with the return of Kenneth Clarke as the Shadow Business Secretary. All Mr Brown and Mr Darling can hope is that this package will, at last, stem the erosion in confidence. The political implications for them if it does not are dire. 

