The Brown Government is very keen to legislate for good intentions. First, climate change, then child poverty and social mobility, and now the 12-page NHS constitution. In each case, there is an ambitious, possibly over-ambitious, objective, but a distinct thinness on the means of achievement. 

New rights and entitlements are dangled in front of us, only to disappear on closer inspection. The NHS constitution is intended to secure the future of the health service via a statement of principles on access based on clinical need, not an individual’s ability to pay, but with a caveat that services are free of charge, “except in limited circumstances sanctioned by Parliament”. There is an unexceptional list of rights for patients and staff, which are largely good practice now. 

The new constitution forms the first five clauses of the new Health Bill introduced into the Lords last week, but patients are not being given new rights that they can use. They are not justiciable. The Bill merely says that various NHS bodies should “have regard” to the NHS constitution when performing their functions. So if you have to wait for a long time, I doubt that waving the constitution in front of them will do you much good. 

The same declaratory approach has been used before. The Climate Change Act that became law last autumn included a legally binding target for cutting carbon dioxide emissions by 80 per cent by 2050, with a new committee to advise on progress. But the target is so far into the future as to lose any practical political meaning. There are no operational implications for government decisions. 

In the current session, a Bill will contain a pledge to eradicate child poverty by 2020. This is a splendid aspiration, but when the Government is certain to miss its target of halving child poverty by next year, the suggested statutory target lacks credibility. Its achievement entirely depends on circumstances: the state of the jobs market and levels of public spending, rather than good intentions. 

Last week, the Government raised the possibility of legislation “to make clear that tackling socio-economic disdvantage and narrowing gaps in outcomes for people from different backgrounds is a core funcation of key public services”. But how? Are there to be quotas? But of whom? This is an immensely complicated area, as last week’s White Paper made clear. 

The trouble with all these promises is not the good intentions but the false expectations that problems can be solved just by passing a law. The new NHS constitution, like the other statutory goals, is a diversion from the real decisions on the scale and use of resources. Getting a more equal, greener and healthier society is not about legislation, but about the awkward choices that have to be taken by politicians. 

