The “cash for amendments” affair should provide an overdue wake-up call for the House of Lords. It has been a scandal waiting to happen. The issue is not just whether four Labour peers have broken the rules of the House but whether those rules are too lax and porous. 

The Lords is now in limbo, between its increasing effectiveness in scrutiny and its outdated internal arrangements, which are still stuck in a club-like era of “good chaps know how to behave”. Most proposals for internal change, such as putting the appointments process on a statutory basis, have been blocked until there is full-scale reform of the Lords. 

Yet, as the Public Administration Committee of the Commons noted last week, longer-term reform, such as an elected chamber, is “some years off even at best”. This delay means that there is no excuse for not taking action now to remedy obvious defects. 

Until now there has been reluctance to make expenses and allowances more transparent and to tighten up regulation despite a partial overhaul of inquiries by a sub-committee on Lords' interests chaired by Baroness Prashar. 

None the less, the latest allegations expose serious flaws. Although paid advocacy is explicitly banned, there are grey areas. Peers know that they “must never accept any financial inducement as an incentive or reward for exercising parliamentary influence”. But if the peer who is being paid persuades another peer to move an amendment to a Bill, then no rule would be broken. Yet this breaks the spirit of the ban. 

Peers are allowed to offer “parliamentary services”, such as advising on the progress of legislation. Yet that allows loopholes. 

The Lords also has few sanctions, apart from “naming and shaming”. Unlike the Commons, there are no powers to suspend or expel members. 

The Upper House prides itself on self-regulation but too often this means very light regulation and “outsiders keep out”. The Lords now has to accept that maintaining public confidence requires both a tougher and more transparent regulatory system. 

