The only real question about the future of the Royal Mail is when, and how, the service will be restructured and partly privatised, not whether. It will happen either over the next year under the Brown Government, or later under a likely Conservative successor. 

The present structure is unsustainable, as Adam Crozier, Royal Mail’s chief executive, said yesterday. Volumes of business are projected to fall sharply and there is the multibillion-pound financial deadweight of the pension fund business. Not enough money is being generated for necessary investment and to ensure the future of the universal service obligation. 

The Government’s solution is to take over the historic pension liabilities but to bring in a minority private sector shareholder to modernise the business. 

There is a choice. For many Labour MPs — and nearly a half of backbenchers have signed a Commons motion opposing government plans — the answer lies within the public sector, combined with changes in the competition rules. There are also questions of pricing, although a rise to overseas levels risks a further reduction in the volume of letters. 
 
The size and vehemence of Labour opposition is not just about the Royal Mail but also reflects more general disillusion with markets and new Labour’s pro-business position since the 1990s. So the only way that the Government will get the legislation through is by relying on Conservative support, as happened on a much smaller scale over the Education Bill in 2005-06. Ministers are playing for time since the Bill is being introduced in the Lords, but this only puts off the main battle until mid-summer, which is likely to be a fraught time for Labour after the June local and European elections. 

The Conservatives are well placed. Kenneth Clarke, who unsuccessfully pressed for privatisation during the Tory years, urged Lord Mandelson yesterday not to “cave in” and said that the Tories would vote “in line with the policy of part-privatisation”. But a lot of mischief can be made in Parliament, over procedural motions and amendments to increase the scale of privatisation, which will highlight Labour divisions and further undermine the Government’s authority. 

Regardless of the noise and battles ahead at Westminster, however, the Royal Mail itself is certain to change radically. 

