The House of Lords has to change. Whatever happens about the charges against the four Labour peers, the many anomalies of the present House have been exposed. The case for urgent action has been increased, not reduced, by the likelihood that no decisions will be taken for several years over whether to have a fully or largely elected chamber. 

The present House mainly consists of part-timers, paid a daily allowance but no salary, who are busier than ever. Yet the Lords is governed by informal customs long ago discarded by other institutions. Any immediate package would have several elements: 

First, the method of appointment, which has worked well so far, should be put on a statutory basis. The commission should assess party nominees on the basis not only of probity or sleaze, but also on whether they are likely to be contribute to the work of the House (as already applies to new crossbenchers). 

Second, there should be provision for retirement. New peers should serve for a fixed term of, say, 15 years. 
 
Third, the link between service in the second chamber and a peerage or title should also be broken. This should, at a stroke, end charges of “cash for peerages”. 

Fourth, the 92 remaining hereditary peers should not be replaced when they die. They would, in effect, become life peers. 

Fifth, the present untaxed allowance of £335.50 for every day a peer attends should be turned into a taxable salary. All expense claims should be backed by specific receipts (as applies to journalists at The Times). 

Sixth, rules on outside interests and disclosure of amounts earned would remain less stringent than for MPs, because most peers would remain part-time. But controls on outside consultancies should be tightened to bar any paid work to do with Parliament, not just paid advocacy or promotion of an issue. This would ensure that outside interests are at arm’s length. 

Seventh, the Lords, like the Commons, should retain ultimate control over regulation and discipline. But the current inward-looking culture should be ended by having an independent element, with the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards looking into complaints on behalf of the sub-committee of members’ interest. 

Eighth, as in the Commons, a range of punishments should be introduced — from censure, via suspension, to expulsion. 

These reforms would align the working practices and rules of the Lords with its responsibilities as an active revising chamber, whether or not elected. Never was Lampedusa’s famous adage in The Leopard, his great novel about 19th-century Italy, been more justified: “If we want things to stay as they are, things will have to change”. 

