Labour and Gordon Brown are obviously down, but they have not yet been knocked out. Or rather David Cameron, while strong favourite to be prime minister by mid-2010, cannot yet claim outright victory. 

The autumn bounce has been reversed as the recession worsens. The latest Populus poll for The Times (for more details see www.populus.co.uk) puts Labour, at 28 per cent, back to where it was last September, but not as low as last summer. 

The Tories, now on 42 per cent, are still four points below their peak last August, and well down on the near 50per cent levels often reached by new Labour in the mid-1990s (although the way polls are conducted has changed since then). 

None of this need necessarily worry Mr Cameron. His party is very well placed, and he has moved well ahead of Mr Brown, not only as the favoured leader to take Britain forward after the next election (by 45 to 28 per cent), but also to deal, now, with Britain's economy in recession, by 41 to 32 per cent. 
 
This is in marked contrast to Mr Brown's 52 to 32 per cent lead as the right leader for the recession as recently as last November. 

There are, however, some caveats. So far the main beneficiaries of the unwinding of the Brown bounce have been the Liberal Democrats and other parties. 

While Mr Brown is being widely written off as doomed to lose, his personal ratings are well up on the very low levels of last July when Cabinet ministers speculated about whether he could survive the year. The number regarding Mr Brown as strong is now 51 per cent, up 22 points since last summer, while those regarding him as weak is down by 20 points to 47 per cent. Still, 63 per cent regard Mr Cameron as strong, and just 31 per cent as weak. 

The number believing Mr Brown is up to the job of being Prime Minister has risen by 17 points to 42 per cent, with Mr Cameron unchanged on 55 per cent. Mr Brown has regained a narrow lead as being for the many, on 58 to 56 per cent. 

There are also tentative signs that the freefall in economic confidence may have bottomed out, albeit at very low levels. 

There remains a big gap between heavy pessimism about the outlook for the economy as a whole and more positive attitudes about prospects for them and their families, especially among professionals and managers. 

Perhaps the most telling answer, however, is that more than half the public think that neither Mr Brown nor Mr Cameron knows what to do about Britain's economic problems, with only just over two fifths thinking that they have clear ideas. 

That sense of drift is the biggest challenge to both main leaders
