The proposal to halve from 30 to 15 years the period before government records are publicly released is both welcome and overdue. But this is only part of the answer to the question of what, and when, the public should know about how decisions are taken on their behalf, as is recognised in yesterday's independent review by a panel including Paul Dacre, Editor of the Daily Mail, who was chairman; Professor Sir David Cannadine, the historian; and Sir Joe Pilling, a retired Permanent Secretary. 

Whitehall is much more open than when the 30-year rule was introduced in 1968, and, as Mr Dacre said, the rule has now been “scuppered” by the Freedom of Information Act. This has resulted in the disclosure of documents on more recent events such as Black Wednesday in 1992. The Information Tribunal ruled this week in favour of the publication of the minutes of Cabinet meetings before the Iraq war in 2003. 

The case for a limit is partly to allow the orderly transfer of public documents to the National Archives in Kew. Fifteen years has been chosen to give some protection to confidential discussions within the term of a premiership (even Baroness Thatcher was in No 10 for only 11 years). The names of individual civil servants would be blacked out to protect their identities over private advice. 

But the Government needs to review its own freedom of information practices and what it automatically makes public. Many ministers and civil servants privately feel that the FOI Act has gone much farther than intended. So we will have more bruising battles unless some broad consensus can be agreed, and ministers may anyway seek to restrict the Act's scope. 

But a review of official papers is out of date in view of the explosion of digital records, with the universal adoption of e-mail and websites as means of government communication. These records are easily lost. So the review recommends as “a matter or urgency” that the Government reviews its strategy here to ensure their preservation. Our knowledge of the Blair and Brown years is at risk. 

Among other proposals, the review urges a new look at the rules on publication of memoirs by ministers and officials; changes to the Civil Service Code to ensure that officials keep full, accurate and impartial records; and a duty on special advisers to maintain a full record of non-political activities. 

Don't expect any sudden revelations. The review recommends a phasing in over 15 years, with two years' records being released every year, so that it would be 2025 when papers for 2009 were available. Much will, in practice, depend on how the FOI develops. 

The review was discussed by the Cabinet on Tuesday, and the Government gave a cautiously positive welcome, agreeing that there should be “a substantial reduction” in the period for release of official papers. But all will depend on the specific provisions and timing. Watch out for the Whitehall battle. 
