The barons knew what they were doing at Runnymede in 1215. The rights of peers deriving from Magna Carta have made it harder to sort out the cash-for-amendments affair. This is turning out to be both very complicated and drawn out. 

First, the police’s decision yesterday not to open an inquiry, while expected, puts the onus on the Lords itself, and its credibility. The investigation by Baroness Prashar’s subcommittee will take a few more weeks. 

Second, if any peer is found guilty of breaching the Lords code on outside interests, all the House can do is “name and shame”. Baroness Scotland of Asthal, the Attorney-General, has told the Lords Privileges Committee, which is meeting today, that, under the writ of summons (back to Magna Carta), the House cannot suspend, let alone expel, a peer. At most, a guilty peer can be encouraged voluntarily to take leave of absence (without any allowances). Any change in the law could take at least a year. 

Third, the committee is looking at how to revise its code. While Lords rules ban “paid advocacy” and promoting a measure for cash, there are many grey areas. It is not just tightening up the rules on consultancies. If a distinguished scientist, or vice-chancellor, speaks in debate, is it paid advocacy? This is nonsense so there is an urgent need for clarification. Moreover, any new arrangements need publicly to be seen as fulfilling external standards of ethical regulation, and probably need to be validated by an outside body. 

Fourth, the latest Populus poll for The Times (for more details see www.populus.co.uk) shows that nine out of ten people believe that peers’ rules of conduct should be as strict as for MPs, and Lords behaving improperly should be kicked out. But 61 per cent accept that if restrictions on outside interests are tightened, peers should be paid a proper salary, rather the current modest allowance. Nearly three quarters (71 per cent) agree that, while peers should not earn money from consultancies having anything to do with Parliament, they should, as part-timers, be allowed to earn money from completely separate jobs. 

Fifth, the Government is considering whether to include measures on resignations, expulsions and disqualification in its constitutional renewal Bill due in the spring. There is also pressure for legislation on making the appointments commission statutory, the future of the remaining 92 hereditaries and the tax status of peers. 

Two Private Member’s Bills are coming up in the Lords that the Government supports in principle, but not in detail. Senior ministers are wary of opening a wider debate now that could delay action. Do not expect action for a long time on an elected second chamber. 

