Immigration and foreign workers, trade union rights, sharply rising unemployment, and the European Union add up to a toxic combination. The dispute at the Lindsey oil refinery in Lincolnshire touches raw nerves over globalisation versus economic nationalism, presenting problems, obviously for the Government, but also for the Opposition. 

The starting point is the free movement of labour within the EU, which is accepted by all main parties. There are as many potential benefits for many British workers in other EU countries as there are for other EU workers coming to Britain. 

EU law lays down that terms of employment should not discriminate between domestic workers and those from the rest of the EU. Yet the EU Posted Workers’ Directive, as reinforced by the Laval case at the European Court of Justice, has only required employers to pay the rate in the country from which foreign workers come, provided that this matches minimum wages and conditions of the host country. In the case of most wealthier EU members, such as Britain, prevailing rates of pay are above these minimum levels. 

The striking workers and unions complain about undercutting of British rates by a subcontractor importing Italian and Portuguese labour at low rates. Acas is now investigating these claims. But, in more forthright terms than other ministers, Lord Mandelson has highlighted a statement by Total, which runs the refinery, that subcontractors are observing collectively negotiated local rates and are not discriminating against British workers (a large majority of those at Lindsey). 
 
Lord Mandelson has robustly defended a free, EU-wide labour market. That is a crucial test of EU membership and of the embrace of globalisation by new Labour. 

The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats essentially agree on the economic issues, and have instead focused their attacks on Gordon Brown’s ill-chosen populist remarks in the autumn of 2007 about “British jobs for British workers”. This phrase is being presented, and was probably always meant, as ensuring that British workers had sufficient skills and training to compete internationally, but it has rebounded on him as it is brandished by the wildcat strikers. This has complicated ministers’ task. 

The dispute poses a problem for the mainstream political class in its support for economic liberalisation when hundreds of thousands of jobs are threatened. An opening has been provided for left-wing critics of free markets and for the nationalist Right in the shape of the British National Party and the UK Independence Party. Ministers need to reassure British workers that they are being treated fairly without fuelling self-destructive economic nationalism.
