The Conservatives still have a team for opposition rather than for government. Yesterday's reshuffle by David Cameron was intended primarily to sharpen up the performance in opposition, balancing the return of Kenneth Clarke with the promotion of some energetic populists on the Right (down-to-earth was the buzzword from the leader's camp).

All the recent attention has been about Mr Clarke. His strengths and weaknesses are well known. The main plus is that he will attract media attention, while he offers shrewdness and experience as a successful Chancellor. But he will not go head-to-head with Lord Mandelson since they are in different houses of Parliament and will only face each other in television studios. The main questions are about Mr Clarke's self-discipline and fresh thinking. On Europe, problems could arise less over the euro than over the Lisbon treaty if it is finally ratified by the Irish Republic. The old bruiser has come back to help to win the election, not to set the course for a Cameron government.

The other shifts are partly to please eurosceptics and the Right, notably the promotions: of the hyperactive Chris Grayling to be Shadow Home Secretary (do not expect much bipartisanship on law and order now); of the pugnacious Mark Francois to the Shadow Cabinet in his current post of Shadow Europe Minister; and of the folksy Eric Pickles to the thankless task of party chairman. As the new Shadow Commons Leader, the independent-minded Alan Duncan may also prove to be a thorn in the side of Harriet Harman.

Most of the changes are of interest only to Tory MPs, activists and Westminster insiders. Even Mr Clarke's return may do little directly to affect Tory fortunes in the polls. The question is more whether, collectively, they will produce a sharper performance. The initial response on the Tory blogsphere was positive, though with an important caveat about whether there will be less cutting edge on public services reform.

This team does not have the look of a first Cameron Cabinet, which could be formed in 15 to 16 months, or less. Of course, winning is the priority for the Tories. But all the preparations for government being overseen by Oliver Letwin and Francis Maude will be undermined if current spokesmen are not intended to be ministers in their areas. What value does that give to the contacts between spokesmen and permanent secretaries which are just starting? In both 1979 and 1997, more than a third of past Shadow teams have not occupied the same posts in government.

Mr Cameron also shares Gordon Brown's fault of giving prizes to (almost) everyone. It is hardly a promising start towards Mr Cameron's promise of reducing the number of politicians when the Shadow Cabinet now numbers 32. This is at least ten too many. Lots of people are going to be disappointed if the Tories win the next election. Mr Cameron still has to show that his party has a clear plan for government, either in policy or personnel.

