The speculation that Gordon Brown would like Cardinal Murphy-O’Connor to become a life peer would remove a historical anomaly but would have no constitutional significance. The main battles over Roman Catholic representation in Parliament were fought 180 years ago. Indeed, there is already a far wider representation of faiths in the Lords than in the Commons, with not only the 26 Anglican bishops, but also prominent Jews, Methodists, Presbyterians, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists and Farsis, and leading lay Roman Catholics. 

The bar on Roman Catholics becoming members of the Lords and the Commons was removed, after a political battle, in 1829. The bar on Jews and others from serving was also ended then. 

The position of priests is more complicated. Practising Anglican clergy and former Catholic priests were disqualified from becoming MPs until 2001. And serving Catholic priests are barred under Canon Law “from assuming public office whenever it means sharing in the exercise of civil power”. Moreover, in a submission to the Royal Commission on the future of the Lords in 1999, the Catholic Bishops of Scotland considered it would be inappropriate for bishops to take up seats in the Upper House because of their primary pastoral responsibilities. Rather, the bishops favoured stronger lay representation of Roman Catholics. 

But what status does a retired archbishop have, since he would remain both a cardinal and priest? Former archbishops of Canterbury and York are made life peers on retirement. 

But, otherwise, there has been no pattern in the appointment of leading religious representatives, apart from the general one of seeking to increase their number. Lord Jakobovits, a favourite of Baroness Thatcher, was ennobled while still Chief Rabbi, more than three years before his retirement in 1991. It is still very much related to the individual rather than a right related to the office. 

Whatever happens to the Anglican bishops, there has been widespread agreement in all debates about the future of the Lords that a range of representation of religious groups should be a feature of any largely appointed second chamber. 
