The death of the child of any political leader has always been big news, producing both sympathy and the temporary suspension of partisan politics. The difference now in a world of emotional disclosure is how to ensure that bereaved parents can grieve in private. 

Fortunately, such deaths are rare. That is partly because for most of the 20th century, politicians became leaders in late middle age when their children were already grown up. 

Grandchildren were more likely to be heard in 10 Downing Street than children, as with both Winston Churchill and Harold Macmillan. And while Harold Wilson was one of the youngest British Prime Ministers on taking office in 1964, his sons were by then nearly adult. The Thatcher twins were well into their 20s by the time their mother became Tory leader, while the son of John Major was 15 when his father became Prime Minister. 

Tony Blair epitomised the shift away from late-middle-aged leaders. He had three children of school age when he entered Downing Street, and during his time there his wife Cherie gave birth to Leo and also suffered a miscarriage. Both were very public events, allowing the family little chance for privacy. 

The trend towards leaders in their early 40s with not only young, but also growing, families, has been underlined by Mr Cameron and by Nick Clegg, who became a father again last weekend. Gordon Brown was a late father, suffering the loss of a daughter only a few days old when he was Chancellor. Now 58, he has two young sons. 

The main British precedent is Asquith, the Liberal leader of a century ago, whose son, Raymond, was killed on the Western Front in 1916. Among the vast numbers of casualties that year, the death of the Prime Minister’s son was a national event. The King and Queen telegraphed their condolences and Downing Street received “telegrams in great number”. 

In America, Abraham Lincoln faced the loss of his son Willie aged 11 in February 1862, at the height of the Civil War. Mourning was widespread. Lincoln grieved silently in his son’s bedroom for two days, while Mary, his wife, wailed for days. 

And a century later, John Fitzgerald and Jacqueline Kennedy suffered the death of a son, Patrick Bouvier, two days after he had been born prematurely in August 1963– less than four months before the President was assassinated. 

