The “Buy American” dispute really matters. At stake is whether the world economy retreats into protectionism and economic nationalisation, setting back recovery from the recession. 

This is a crucial test for President Barack Obama, and especially his relations with Europe. He sent out ambiguous signals during last year’s election about both protecting American workers and being an internationalist. There are uncanny parallels with 1933 when Franklin Roosevelt was also acclaimed as a new President offering hope and a fresh start. 

Yet FDR was an economic nationalist, believing that the answer to the depression lay at home, not overseas. Originally, he backed an economic conference in London to “supplement individual domestic programmes for economic recovery, by wise and considered international action”, the same aims as now. But FDR then rejected a compromise accepted by US negotiators, scuppering the conference and giving a push to nationalism and high tariffs which delayed recovery. The Europeans were not blameless either since they had already raised trade barriers. 

The same risks exist now. The US economic recovery package passed by the House of Representatives contains explictly protectionist language and provisions to ensure that only American iron, steel and manufactured goods are used in infrastructure and other projects funded by the legislation. Ambassadors from the EU, its member countries and Canada have already protested, warning that such powers would trigger retaliatory moves. Of course, some of this is sabre rattling to try to influence the Obama Administration and the Senate. And 10 Downing Street was talking softly yesterday. 

But this move is part of a wider trend towards what Gordon Brown has called deglobalisation. Another aspect is the withdrawal by weakened banks from international lending to concentrate, instead, on their domestic markets: one reason for the shortage of credit at present in Britain. 

The nightmare for Mr Brown is that the much hyped summit of the G20 leaders in London in early April will not repeat the success of the Bretton Woods meeting of 1944 which launched the post-war international financial system, but could, rather, face the risk of failure of the London economic conference of 1933. Tensions already exist over the Chinese currency. But “Buy American” moves could seriously threaten summit preparations. 

