BRITISH politics is now about who can claim the mantle of Tony Blair. Just as he seized the post-Thatcherite agenda from the mid-1990s, so there is now a battle within and between the parties for the post-Blair inheritance. 
The challenge is partly electoral and partly ideological. There were distinct echoes of Mr Blair’s conference speech in the remarks by David Davis and David Cameron at the launch of their campaigns yesterday. Both “borrowed” phrases, “opportunity for the many, not just the privileged few”, previously used by new Labour. 

Their campaign launches were revealing. Mr Davis has the broader and deeper support: both in numbers and a wide range across the party, from Ian Taylor to Eric Forth, and from Julian Brazier to David Willetts. There were grey hairs, wide girths, and more than a whiff of ambition, of MPs thinking they have spotted a winner. But the Davis message was rather bland. 

By contrast, Mr Cameron was sharper and deeper, both in his statement and in answering questions. But as shown by the supporters present at his launch, Mr Cameron draws on a narrow base of sleek, affluent, metropolitan professionals. Apart from John Butterfill, there was no hint of provincial Toryism. Mr Cameron’s candidacy is cursed with the “Notting Hill set” label. 

Both candidates know that, to be successful, the Tories have to operate in the post-Blair framework. Mr Davis matched a key section in Mr Blair’s speech about the wealthy always having had choice. “The best-off in society can move house or go private if they want to get their children into good schools. They can take out health insurance or pay if they fall ill and want to get treated quickly . . . But most families don’t have these options.” 

Similarly, Mr Cameron criticised the Tory manifesto proposal to provide financial support for those who want private operations. This, he said, was seen as “helping a few middle-class people opt out of the NHS”. 

So, like Mr Blair, both recognise that the challenge is to improve existing services sufficiently for all that the better-off do not want to go private. There are big differences on pace and means, but the Tory candidates, the Blairites and some modernising Liberal Democrats, agree on the thrust of reform: more choice and diversity. But the Tories need to show that this is not just for the better-off. 

There are a number of tests for potential Tory leaders over the next two months. Do they really understand why the party has done so badly in recent elections? Are they really capable of reaching out beyond the core of a third of those who vote? 

The paradox is that in order to win, candidates need to appeal to precisely that narrow, atypical core, first of Tory MPs, and then of party members. The immediate challenge is to get into the final two. Mr Davis looks certain to be one. Kenneth Clarke has had a very strong September and is picking up support around the country, but lacks younger MPs. 

This is the reverse of Mr Cameron’s problem, who needs a few grey hairs to gain some momentum. Liam Fox has greater support at Westminster than many suspected, but does he have the weight and grasp of what the Tories need to do? For all his experience, Sir Malcolm Rifkind has yet to show that he is more than an also-ran. 

The party conference provides an opportunity to impress, or to trip up. 

