The most memorable political speech of the year was made not in Parliament, nor at one of the autumn party conferences (certainly not there), but on the stage of the Olivier Theatre. So forget Tony, Gordon, Iain, Charles and the rest of the cast of the Westminster follies. My politician of the year is Alexander Herzen, the 19th-century Russian writer, propagandist and populist. He has been dead for 132 years. But, as brought to life by Tom Stoppard in his Coast of Utopia trilogy, he remains today as persuasive a voice of measured good sense against the lure of abstract solutions as ever. 
The nine-hour Stoppard trilogy was criticised for being rambling, unfair to the real protagonists and lacking much of the author’s usual sparkle. The plays could have been trimmed and sharpened. The treatments of the irrepressible anarchist Bakunin and of the bombastic, egocentric Karl Marx (“he’s such a townie”) were one-sided, although that malign rogue Marx deserves lèse-majesté for once. However, the plays are fully vindicated by the central moral vision, and personal tragedy, of Herzen, as played with wry detachment by Stephen Dillane. 

Herzen was outraged at autocracy and injustice alike, but refused to be swept along by the abstract enthusiasms of his fellow Russian intellectuals and exiles in Western Europe. His doubts about their idealistic simplicities were fuelled by the collapse of the revolutions across Europe in 1848. 

Contrary to the determinism fashionable among his contemporaries, Herzen argues in the trilogy in an exchange with Marx: “History has no culmination. There is always as much in front as behind. There is no libretto. History knocks at a thousand gates at every moment, and the gatekeeper is chance. We shout into the mist for this one or that one to be opened for us, but through every gate there are a thousand more.” 

None of this is exaggeration or dramatic licence by Stoppard; if anything, the reverse. The real Herzen was even more eloquent than depicted on the stage. Before Stoppard, the case for Herzen was made most strongly by Isaiah Berlin, in many ways a 20th-century version of his 19th-century fellow sage and exile. Stoppard has acknowledged his debt to Berlin’s Russian Thinkers, while many of the words expressed by Herzen on stage are virtually the same as he originally wrote. 

In his political testament of 1848, From the Other Shore, Herzen wrote: “History is all improvisation, all will, all extempore — there are no frontiers, no itineraries.” 

Herzen was contemptuous of those who demand sacrifice to fulfil their long-term goals. As Berlin summarises Herzen’s position: “No distant ends, no appeals to overriding principles, or abstract nouns can justify the suppression of liberty, or fraud, violence and tyranny.” 

Appeals to history and all the “isms” are the path to destruction. In an uncannily prescient passage looking forward to the horrors that were created a century later by Stalin and Hitler, Herzen wrote: “The whole of Europe will leave its normal courses and will be drowned in a general cataclysm.” 

His warning about the danger of seductive appeals to sacrifice in the interests of the “greater good”, the nation, the faith or the like is obviously pertinent today. The hijackers of September 11 and the Palestinian suicide bombers have been swept up in that corrosive and evil logic. In the Stoppard version, Herzen says: “Who is there brave enough to say that dying for liberty or progress is not the apex of human happiness when the sacrifice is for vainglory and five kinds of authority dressed up in revolutionary slogans?” 

But Herzen/Berlin/Stoppard — their outlooks so overlap — also have much to say to democratic politicians, as well as to revolutionaries, totalitarian leaders and terrorists. Admittedly, Herzen was no Western democrat: he had little time for parliaments. But his political outlook was gradualist, reformist, remedying clearly identifiable defects for the benefit of the present, not the indefinite future. A world of modest, achievable promises, neither spin nor revolutionary slogans. 

I saw the plays over three weeks at the start of the party conference season. Nothing I heard in Brighton, Blackpool and Bournemouth approached the eloquence and moral force of Stoppard/Herzen’s final speech rejecting historical necessity: “What kind of beast is it, this Ginger Cat with its insatiable appetite for human sacrifice? This Moloch who promises that everything will be beautiful after we’re dead? A distant end is not an end but a trap. The end we work for must be closer, the labourer’s wage, the pleasure in the work done, the summer lightning of personal happiness.” 

