The Government has found it much harder to eliminate poverty and social exclusion than suggested in its grand claims of a decade ago. The striking feature of the new monitoring report from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation is not just how, in aggregate, some of the earlier improvement has stalled since 2002-03, but also how patchy the picture is. There are limits on what government can do in face of longer-term social and behavioural trends and global economic forces. 

There is only an inexact link between the Government’s own priorities and performance. For instance, the growth of public spending was higher after 2003 than between 1997 and 2002. In the second half of the decade, however, there has been a halving in the number of indicators of poverty and social exclusion improving, and a doubling in the number worsening. 

The authors note the paradox that the wide range of the 1998 strategy has been replaced by a concentration on ending child poverty, yet the number in child poverty has risen in the past three years. This was also the period when spending on child tax credits, one of Gordon Brown’s key policies, was rising sharply. While the credits have helped increasing numbers of children to escape poverty, the number requiring such help has also risen sharply. 

The report questions the Brownite mantra that work is the route out of poverty. There has been a steady rise since 2004 in the number with jobs who are poorer so that, now, a child in poverty is more likely to belong to a working family than to a nonworking one. That in turn partly reflects the impact of globalisation and immigration in holding down pay rises, especially for unskilled workers. 

There have, however, been some sustained improvement over the past decade, notably in the educational performance of 11 and 16-year-olds (although a tenth of the latter still get few or no GCSEs of any kind), in infant and under65 deaths, in the income gap between low-paid men and women, and in the number of single pensioners in low-income households. The Government had at least some influence in its school policies and via the big increase in spending on pensioners. The outright failures, such as the inability to reduce the number of underage pregnancies, exposes the limits of policy in relation to personal behaviour. 

As the report notes: “Just because government wants to do something does not always mean it really can.” There has also been little change in the geographic concentration of those without jobs and receiving benefits, leaving pockets of serious deprivation. 

The data on which this report was based predate the start of the recession. Several of the key measures – unemployment, and the number of children in low-income and workless households – are bound to deteriorate now. Despite the mildly redistributionist slant of the PreBudget Report, the planned sharp slowdown in the growth of public spending limits what the Government can do to help to solve deep-seated social problems that are often largely outside its control. 

