Prime Ministers invariably want more expansion than either chancellors or governors of the Bank of England. This is little to do with the people and more about the institutions they head. 

The real significance of Mervyn King’s caution about a further fiscal stimulus is the timing — four weeks before the delayed Budget. He has said publicly what many Treasury officials are saying privately. 

What is in dispute is the scale of any action. But Mr King was careful to add that this does not rule out “targeted and selected measures”, in the labour market to help people back to work or in corporate credit. Help for older savers is also likely. 

Tensions certainly exist at present between the Treasury and 10 Downing Street. But they should not be exaggerated. Despite strains, Alistair Darling gets on much better with Gordon Brown than Mr Brown did with Tony Blair. From 1997 until 2007, No 10 often felt excluded by the Chancellor’s inner circle. 


Relations have been far, far worse in the past when prime ministers have intervened in economic decisions. Macmillan would overrule his chancellors in the most brutal way for being too worried about inflation and not being expansionary enough, so that one, Peter Thorneycroft, resigned, while another, Selwyn Lloyd, was sacked. 

Margaret Thatcher was not slow to remind colleagues that she was First Lord of the Treasury. 

Governors of the Bank have not been shy about expressing their views, either. When Labour came to power in 1964, Lord Cromer, the traditionalist Governor, told Harold Wilson that he must cut public spending and abandon manifesto policies — only to be put firmly in his place by the Prime Minister, who threatened an election. 

Subsequent governors have generally been voices of fiscal, as well as monetary, caution. Mr King is much more of a public figure than most of his predecessors since he often appears before parliamentary committees, when he is asked about fiscal as well as monetary policy. 

The substance of the current debate is: how much more of a fiscal stimulus should there be? Mr King’s caution echoes that of the CBI, as well as, for instance, Germany. The Treasury sympathises, since it is worried about adding to the already very high level of public borrowing, and therefore to what will have to be done — probably after the election — to squeeze public spending and raise taxes. 

The key decisions will be taken after next week’s G20 summit. There will be no public dramas, but watch out in the Budget for how Mr Darling intends to achieve his goal, repeated yesterday, of “ensuring the sustainability of public finances”. 

