The crucial test for any aspiring prime minister is whether he addresses the acute fiscal crisis now, before the election. This is not about precise policies that cannot be decided. What matters is admitting the seriousness of the problem and the painful options. David Cameron’s speech was along the right lines, not least on a day when the dire trend of public borrowing was underlined. But his big omissions were also revealing. 

Mr Cameron steered away from a slash-and-burn attitude to the public sector, or to tax cuts at all costs. Sharing the proceeds of growth between higher spending, tax cuts and debt reduction has been replaced by the priority of debt reduction to aid recovery. Public service reform will continue, though he accepts that this will not produce expenditure savings in the short term. 

On public spending, he talks of getting “more for less”, a suggestion similar to the repeated theme of Sir Gus O’Donnell, the Cabinet Secretary, in his speeches to civil servants. Mr Cameron stresses that “we’re not going to rest our whole strategy for living within our means on a simplistic list of efficiency savings”. There will be “serious pay restraint” for those “who work behind the front line in public administration”. 

Yet the fiscal adjustment will involve far tougher decisions. Mr Cameron said that his Shadow Cabinet was looking “at every single extension of the State” to see whether it is justified. 

But where? Apart from hinting at cutting tax credits for middle- income earners, the Tory leader said nothing about which state activities can be cut back or would go. The big issue is which core services should remain taxpayer- funded — such as schools and the NHS — and how far direct payments should be extended to, for instance, the elderly, childcare and tuition fees. The Conservatives need to address these issues before the election. 

The other big omission is on the tax side. Not only will there be no room for many years for cuts in the tax burden, as distinct from shifts from one tax to another, but taxes are also going to have to rise in the next Parliament in order to cut debt. This is not least because of the enormous hole that has opened up as a result of a probably lasting shortfall in tax receipts from the City and financial services. 

If the Tories now recognise the severity of the crisis, the Government is still in public denial. Ministers are unwilling to acknowledge that fiscal policy was unsustainable before the recession, and, in future, they refer only to spending restraint. But it is going to be much nastier than that. This is not about apologies, but about being honest with voters. 

