Death by a thousand cuts is always politically preferable to the slaughter of the first- born: or, in public spending terms, closing hospitals or schools and cancelling high-profile projects. That is why most economy drives, in reality involving slower growth rather than cuts in cash term, are less gory than slash-and-burn headlines and vivid ministerial warnings. 

The Treasury always pulls out three options: 

1 Setting tight efficiency targets to squeeze spending. The administrative budgets of many departments are falling in cash, let alone real, terms. Belts can always be tightened. Savings can be presented as cutting waste, and the impact is widely spread; 

2 Spending on big capital projects can be stretched, or delayed. This is happening to the two big Royal Navy carriers and may occur with the Trident replacement. Smaller, less high-profile, projects can be cancelled. Few voters complain at the time about a new building that is not put up, which is why capital budgets are always vulnerable; 

3 Assets can be sold and the proceeds used to finance mainstream, or frontline, services. There is already a drive to dispose of surplus public sector property. 

Such squeezes are assumed in Treasury forecasts of a much slower growth in public spending, and any package will involve higher taxes — not increases in the basic rate of income tax but a wider range of less visible, stealth taxes. 

Real cutbacks mean pulling the State out of activities, or changing entitlements. That generates vocal protests. Cancelling identity cards or regional tiers of government will not be nearly enough. An incoming government will have to decide how far to extend direct charging for services such as higher education, and child and elderly care. Road pricing for existing motorways is bound to be revived. 

Before the 1979 election, the Conservative Opposition prepared detailed spending options in secret, which new ministers took to their departments. But the extent of the fiscal crisis required even larger savings, which took many years to achieve after the privatisation of the main utilities and the sale of council houses. A crucial early decision was to base the annual uprating of state pensions on the increase in prices rather than earnings, which by 1997 produced savings of several billion pounds. 

The Tories are not at that stage yet. They do not want to scare voters, and help Labour. So David Cameron is still talking like King Lear: “I will do such things — what they are yet I know not — but they shall be the terrors of the Earth.” 

We will have to wait to find out the nature of the terrors. 

