The constitutional reform debate is a low priority at present, overshadowed by the severity of the recession. Yet, according to Jack Straw, these very uncertainties underline the need to clarify citizens’ relations with the state, the essence of his very green paper yesterday on “Rights and Responsibilities”. Despite far-reaching constitutional changes since 1997, there are still many, big unresolved issues. 

When Gordon Brown became Prime Minister in mid-2007, he sought to launch a wave of new constitutional activity. Yet little has happened, though the long delayed reform bill (largely a series of tidying up measures) should at last appear in May. 

The underlying question is how far Britain goes towards a fully written or codified constitution, which would mean giving more power to the judiciary. There is no appetite at Westminster for enhancing the role of what even QC MPs described as “unelected judges”. It is common ground that basic economic and social questions should be decided by the executive and a majority in Parliament. 

If the creation of more justiciable rights is ruled out, is there any point in merely issuing a declaratory statement? Mr Straw argued in favour of moving from a rights culture to a rights and responsibilities culture, including the duties of citizens and the new post-war rights of social justice, victims’ rights, equality and good administration. 

There is always the risk of vague good intentions, though the Green Paper suggests that a new statement, or bill, might have an interpretative standing, informing court and public authority decisions, while not creating enforceable individual rights. 

The main reaction in the Commons was indifference from all sides: just one Labour MP, Andrew Dismore, chairman of the Joint Committee on Human Rights, intervened, while Dominic Grieve, for the Tories, wondered what was the point, apart from jeopardising the clarity of the law. The Tories still, or course, have to sort out their own deep divisions on Human Rights Act. 

Nothing is going to happen to the Green Paper in the short-term. Mr Straw tried to make the best out of the lack of enthusiasm, including from within the Cabinet, by saying “the deliberation must not and will not be rushed”. So there will be no bill this side of a general election. But, in whatever form, these questions about rights and duties will return afterwards. 

