ASTON VILLA and West Brom will both try to buy strikers in the next two weeks as they continue their journeys towards the Champions League and the Championship.

Villa, still ahead of Arsenal in the chase for a top-four finish, fear they rely too heavily on Gabriel Agbonlahor and Ashley Young.

Those two might need a rest before the end of a season which began in mid-July with the Intertoto Cup.

West Brom, still bottom of the table and favourites to go down for the third time in seven ­seasons, need attacking ­reinforcements. Their goal ­difference is substantially worse than those of their relegation rivals.

Villa manager Martin O’Neill said: “If we were to lose Ashley and Gabby to injury, it would be like Manchester United losing Wayne Rooney and Cristiano Ronaldo – and we don’t have the same resources as the other clubs in the top band. 

“We aren’t able to rotate as much as the top sides but, as the fixtures keep coming, it would be nice to be able to rest people as it is a long season.

“I have got a couple of weeks [of the transfer window] and we are looking every single day and we will see what we can do.”



West Brom manager Tony Mowbray said: “If we’d had Villa’s forward line, I think we would have won. But the fact that our main threat was Jay Simpson, a 21-year-old on loan to us [from Arsenal], just about sums up where we are.

 

 

“You can see that Simpson has that extra bit of quality. He is a clever, intelligent footballer who makes intelligent runs and we’ll see if he is a finisher when he gets chances to finish. 

“But I hope to bring another centre-forward in during the next week or two and improve the quality we have available.”

Mowbray’s men, who travel to Peterborough for an FA Cup replay tomorrow, deserve credit for continuing to play passing football despite their perilous position. But an expansive style played into the hands of Villa, who are much more pragmatic.

The sartorial choices of the rival managers on the touchline epitomised their teams. Mowbray, who was looking like Mr Punch spruced up for a ­wedding, wore a suit and tie. He clearly enjoys being smart and wants his team to look nice, so they pass and pass – although sometimes it is as if they think passing is an end in itself. 

O’Neill wore several layers of shapeless training gear while he bounced up and down ­excitedly. Appearances are less important to him and he does not want his team to mess about. 

They hit the ball forward quickly towards Agbonlahor, knowing that if it goes vaguely near him he will probably reach it before defenders, or they encourage Ashley Young to charge out of his own half with the ball at his feet.

O’Neill said: “He was running 60 yards at a time and that takes so much pressure off us.”

It was an Albion old boy Curtis Davies who headed Villa in front after 19 minutes, diving to reach a centred ball from midfielder Gareth Barry.

The celebrations of Davies were muted and he said: “West Brom fans hate me and I didn’t want to make things worse. And I’ve still got a lot of friends at the club”.

There are fewer of those than he imagines, because there were times when he was trying to get away when he displayed a marked reluctance to play for them.

Villa’s second goal came four minutes before half-time, as Albion retreated respectfully from Agbonlahor, who cut in from the left and scored with a shot which went in off ­goalkeeper Scott Carson. 

The Premier League’s dubious goals panel will have to adjudicate. 

But O’Neill said: “If they say it’s an own goal then that would be a real injustice. Gabby had been ill all week and he deserves that goal just for ­getting out on the pitch.” Albion looked as if they might be buried under a goals avalanche, but then James Morrison worked himself enough room to score with a deflected shot five minutes into the second half.

Mowbray wanted a penalty at the death for Ashley Young’s challenge on Robert Koren and said: “I’ve watched it again and there was no contact on the ball, so it should have been a penalty.” 

O’Neil, however, added: “I’ve seen it and Ashley clearly got the ball.”

Who said video replays would solve everything?

