DON’T talk to Southampton about the romance of the cup. They were left arguing about three contentious decisions as they were dumped out by Manchester United last night.


Referee Mike Riley allowed a goal Southampton thought was offside, sent off a Saint they insisted had not sinned and awarded a penalty about which they were furious.


Yet, even as manager Jan Poortvliet protested about Riley in a manner which might well bring an FA charge, he conceded that United had produced a footballing masterclass.


And the truth is that it was a saunter for the English, European and world champions, who allowed Cristiano Ronaldo and Carlos Tevez to go home to Portugal and Argentina, started with Wayne Rooney on the bench and yet still packed enough class to stroll through the tie.


Two of their goals came from kids – Danny Welbeck and Darron Gibson – but it was Dimitar Berbatov, ambling about with a studied nonchalance, who epitomised United’s languid dominance.


So there was never going to be a repeat of Southampton’s famous cup final victory over United in 1976. Then, as now, Southampton were in English football’s second tier and as the team bus returned to the South Coast down the M3 motorway from their 1-0 Wembley win, crowds cheered from every bridge.


Last night, all you could hear was the sound of moaning about Riley.
   
Poortvliet, who confronted Riley in the tunnel at half- time, said: “You want neutral people who will give the same decisions to both teams, but he does not know my boys and helps the big teams.”


Yet there were no complaints during the game about the first goal after 21 minutes. Saints goalkeeper Kelvin Davis did well enough to tip Anderson’s fierce drive over the bar, but from the corner, taken by Ryan Giggs, the home defence was left bewildered by United’s movement and watched as John O’Shea rose unhindered to head against the bar and were still watching as Welbeck prodded home the rebound.


TV replays raised the suspicion that the teenager was offside when O’Shea headed the ball but Welbeck, who was only 18 in November, has now scored twice in his four senior appearances, all of which have been this season.


He is leggy and a little raw, but he is Manchester-born, has worked his way up through the United youth system and has the potential to become a fans’ favourite.


Sixteen minutes later, Matthew Paterson’s sending off left the home team outnumbered and further aggrieved. 


Paterson, who had already clattered into Johnny Evans, lunged towards Nemanja Vidic. He protested that he went for the ball, but he did so with a reckless stamping motion and caught Vidic’s shin. Poortvliet said: “It was a normal tackle. He went with one foot and not two. I know the boy.”


But of all Riley’s decisions, this was the easiest and he got it completely right. It was the sort of challenge which was part and parcel of the game in 1976, but, unless Southampton have not been watching any televised football this season, they must have known a red card was coming. Referee Riley followed current procedure and dismissed Paterson, but the player left the field wiping tears away with his shirt.


Home fans were further incensed by the referee when he awarded the penalty three minutes into the second half. David McGoldrick lifted his arm as he jumped in a 
defensive wall and Nani’s free-kick seemed to strike him on the shoulder.


Bizarrely, and wrongly, McGoldrick protested that the ball had hit him on the head – and such a phoney alibi suggested that perhaps he thought he had handled.


Even stranger still, Poortvliet said that the ball had hit the underside of McGoldrick’s arm and suggested that shouldn’t count for some reason known only to him. “It was a cheap penalty,” said the manager.


Nani ignored the controversy and placidly converted the spot-kick.


United’s third goal, nine minutes from the end, came from substitute Gibson, 21, from Londonderry. It was his first United goal and he collected it with aplomb, flicking the ball up and 
volleying home after a pass by the beguiling Berbatov.
