YOU will respond by saying “My heart bleeds”, I know, but Roman Abramovich is feeling the pinch from the credit crunch.

His decision to move a lot – and I do mean a lot – of his money into a Russian steel company called Evraz proved his worst investment since Andriy Shevchenko.

Abramovich is not down to his last super-yacht, or anything like that, of course. But his people have been instructed to watch the roubles.

His people at Chelsea were already doing so, as they’re pretending the club will be self-funding by 2010. 

That is a pretence because they won’t pay back the £600 million Abramovich has spent on his London hobby. But they have promised him he won’t have to keep underwriting losses and so are cutting back by 15 per cent and have told Luiz Felipe Scolari he can’t shop for players in January.

“Big Phil” has not taken that news well. He wants a couple of reinforcements and said so at a supporters’ forum – but, in case his words were interpreted as a criticism of Abramovich, they were hurriedly censored from the club website.

As Jose Mourinho discovered, it is not a good idea to fall out with Abramovich, but my sympathies are entirely with the manager this time. Of course Scolari’s men should ease through to the next stage of the Champions League tonight against Cluj – who look more like a misprint than a threat – but the remainder of Chelsea’s season could unravel if they don’t buy a striker.

They’ve got the Premier League’s leading scorer in Nicolas Anelka and one of the great centre-forwards in Didier Drogba. But that’s not enough. When those two are asked to play together, they don’t. Anelka has to move out wide on the right, which is a waste, and means the omission of a proper midfielder.

   

For home games, when the visiting teams have begun to stifle Chelsea, Scolari’s passing game calls for the sort of
subtlety neither striker can provide.

Scolari’s lack of attacking options was underlined at the weekend. When Manchester United needed a goal against Sunderland, they sent on Carlos Tevez to join Wayne Rooney and Dimitar Berbatov.

Chelsea’s attacking substitutes that day were Scott Sinclair and Miroslav Stoch.

It would be such a false economy to enter the business end of the Champions League with such meagre resources because, for the money Abramovich spends on armour-plating his boats and other toys, Scolari could fill the striking omission in his squad.

Drogba appears to be counting the days until he can join Mourinho in Milan but is available tonight after his suspension for coin-throwing. 

It is Chelsea who need to throw the cash about in January.

