SOUTHAMPTON ushered Wolves towards the Premier League with a calamitous defensive collapse which probably means they will be in League One next season.


There has been much debate this week about the relative merits of zonal and man-for-man marking at corners. Southampton decided to do neither.

So Championship leaders Wolves scored twice from corners in the first six minutes, added a penalty 13 minutes later and freewheeled for the rest of the match.

Wolves now have 80 points. That would have been sufficient to earn promotion last season, and they are edging closer to only their second season in the top division since 1984 – although, inevitably, manager Mick McCarthy, is pretending otherwise.

He said: “I will not contemplate Premier League football. We still have games to play in this division, starting with a difficult match at Derby on Monday.”

Southampton manager Mark Wotte said: “We did a terrible job for the first six minutes and then you have to throw away all your preparation.”

The result itself does not condemn Saints to relegation. They are only two points shy of the first safety position. But this was an abject performance, lacking spirit, belief and organisation – and they still have the threat of a 10-point penalty hanging over them.

Wotte said: “You cannot blame the off-the-pitch worries. That would be a very cheap excuse. But I can blame my defence for not attacking the ball at corners.”

If Southampton go down without the help of a points deduction, then the points could be docked next season. It is a lamentable position for a club who were relegated in 2005 after 27 years in the top division. Only about a thousand Southampton fans made the trip to the Midlands. Perhaps others had heard the Saints defence was not going to turn up either.


Just 40 seconds into the match, nobody at all did anything to inhibit Sam Vokes as he galloped in to head home from a David Jones corner.

Vokes was born in Southampton and grew up supporting them. He said: “It was a bitter-sweet experience for me.”

Before long, there was another corner from the right and another simple goal. Southampton’s clueless defending was exposed as the corner was taken short, but given back to Jones, who knocked in a cross from which Jody Craddock scored with a routine header.

McCarthy said: “We have been bitching about not scoring enough goals from corners. Today we got two good deliveries and two goals.”

After 19 minutes, Saints striker Marek Saganowski decided to help out his demoralised defence, but his foul on David Edwards was spotted by assistant referee Steve Rushton and Jones, having made two goals, thumped in the third from the penalty spot.

Game over. In fact, long before the end, home supporters were orchestrating Mexican waves, a sure-fire indicator that the match was no longer meaningful.

