NIALL QUINN’S body language after the defeat at Old Trafford epitomised the outstanding leadership he provided last week and then gave a hint of the work he will start today.

The Sunderland chairman saw his team’s defence finally breached in injury-time, yet he camouflaged the sickening disappointment he must have felt long enough to stand tall in the directors’ box and applaud his players from the pitch.

Then, with the conspicuous public gesture of support over, he hunched his shoulders, adjusted the collar of his coat and his scarf against the cold and exhaled a long, slow breath.

Quinn was standing tall all last week when manager Roy Keane went AWOL and then announced he had quit.

Lesser men would have pointed to the real problems at the club and complained that they have been exacerbated by Keane spending so little time at the training ground before finally flouncing away. 

Now that he has gone, the full picture of his prickly relationship with Quinn has emerged and how difficult it must have been for the chairman to tolerate being treated with almost open disdain by a manager who appeared often to find walking his dog more important than training his players.


But Quinn struck an entirely different tone. He urged both supporters and reporters to appreciate what Keane had achieved at Sunderland.


 

  
Interim manager Ricky Sbragia was equally measured after the Old Trafford defeat, adamantly denying rumours that some players were delighted Keane had gone.

But Sbragia let slip that, with Thursday a write-off because of the aftershocks of Keane’s departure, Sunderland’s players had only Friday to prepare in detail for the Old Trafford match – and the weather reduced the session to 40 minutes.

Sbragia also pointed out that many of the current squad joined Sunderland only because of Keane’s reputation. But that means many could be on the phone to their agents now asking them to engineer a transfer.

In addition, American businessman Ellis Short, who now controls the club, wants a cull of the lightweights and misfits in a first-team squad of 38 players and has appointed new executives at the Stadium of Light tasked with creating an “international brand”.

Suggestions that Short’s camp lost patience with Keane and labelled him “unbalanced” were quickly denied, but it is clear that the club are at a pivotal moment, with much at stake as a new manager is appointed with the task of lifting them out of the bottom three.

So you start to understand Quinn’s long sigh at the finish at Old Trafford. He will play the leading role in the appointment.

Short stealthily acquired a majority share­holding less than three months ago, but it was Quinn who encouraged Short’s involvement at the club after meeting him at a golf tournament and Short will defer to Quinn’s knowledge of potential managers. The job will not go to Sbragia, the former reserve team manager at Old Trafford, decent man though he is.

Nor is player-coach Dwight Yorke a serious candidate. He was a legendary party animal in his days at United and is unlikely to be asked to instil discipline in a squad which demonstrated a lack of it during Keane’s final months.

Yet Yorke, formerly a livewire striker, was a very responsible holding midfield player as Sbragia set out to stifle United. It made the match about as disappointing as a visit to Lapland New Forest. 

Then United defender Nemanja Vidic was thrown forward, leaving Rio Ferdinand on his own in the centre of the defence to deal with the unlikely event of Sunderland venturing out of their own half.

Vidic snatched the winner and forced Quinn to make his ostentatious gesture of support, followed by that inadvertent sign of concern.

He says there is no rush to make an appointment, but the truth is he must tackle the task with urgency, starting today.

