CRAIG WESTCARR is not a name with which many of you will be familiar and that tells you how capricious ­football can be. 

At 16 he was an England youth international and the youngest player to appear in the Nottingham Forest first team. But instead of becoming the next big thing, he slipped out of the Football League.

Then, for five fleeting minutes, FA Cup fame beckoned. Kettering, from the Blue Square Premier, had twice battled back from behind against Fulham and Westcarr had scored both goals. If they had held on, we would all have awoken yesterday to headlines about him.

Kettering were the lowest-placed survivors in the competition and 89 rungs below Fulham. History beckoned. As it was, Fulham scored twice in the last two minutes and Westcarr’s exploits became a footnote in the weekend’s drama, instead of elevating him to the status of cup legend and making him the inevitable centre of media attention ahead of the replay.

He said: “People will see that I scored two, but it means nothing does it? Kettering got beaten 4-2 and so we’re not a story. At the end I was going to swap shirts with Andy Johnson, but I didn’t know if we were allowed to.

“Knowing my luck, if I’d given my shirt away it would have come out of my wages. So I missed out on that as well.

“But we have to move on. We have got Stevenage on Tuesday and that’s a big game for us.”



 



Kettering manager Mark Cooper pretended to be equally focused on that fixture, but he did not fool anyone either. Kettering’s moment in the national spotlight had gone and the deflation was obvious and understandable.

There was no solace to be gleaned, even when Roy Hodgson, the Fulham manager, made a point of going into the home dressing room to tell the Kettering players that they had played well.

They had indeed and the result was a cruelly inaccurate reflection on the balance of play, although Fulham had looked in control after taking a 13th-minute lead through Simon Davies’s perfect volley.

Westcarr’s first equaliser, nine minutes before half-time, was a free-kick which changed direction after striking Zoltan Gera and it galvanised Rockingham Road. Fans in the Sid Chapman terrace, behind the advert for Frank Beale Vehicle Dismantlers, were in raptures.

Fulham’s second goal came with only 13 minutes remaining. A shot from Danny Murphy was deflected in off Exodus Geohaghan. Brede Hangeland should have been red-carded for hauling down Westcarr in front of goal after 83 minutes. Striker Westcarr, who will be 24 this week, said: “I thought he could have been sent off, definitely. But I didn’t mind getting up and scoring with the penalty.”

Yet as those of us from the media were preparing our paean about Westcarr, Bobby Zamora intervened. First, when the former Arsenal goalkeeper Lee Harper flapped under Davies’ centre and Zamora headed the ball back into the middle for Johnson to nod home.

Then Zamora turned and drilled in an excellent goal of his own, only his third in two seasons and brutally harsh on Kettering.

As they try to concentrate on Stevenage, Fulham are at Sunderland tomorrow and there will be increased attention on their midfield. Dickson Etuhu looked a poor replacement for Jimmy Bullard, or rather, he looked magnificent but delivered precious little.

Bullard’s sale to Hull rankles with Fulham fans, but Murphy said: “The offer of security for him and his family was there and he decided to take that opportunity. I can’t really criticise him for that.

“He has taken a bit of a risk going to Hull but that’s his choice and his decision.”

