JOSE MOURINHO lost 21 of his 185 matches as Chelsea manager. He drew another 40 and so failed to win very nearly one-third of the games in which he was in charge.

So please do not fall for the Mourinho myth, the revision of history which recasts him as an invincible superman. Chelsea’s current frailties were conspicuous in the feeble capitulation to Manchester United, and it is undeniable that 
Luiz Felipe Scolari is struggling.

So Mourinho’s presence at Old Trafford was like a former lover turning up, honed and handsome, as a newlywed couple start to have doubts about each other. Preening Portuguese Mourinho also gave a smug interview in which he claimed that he would have won the Champions League for Chelsea – if only they had not got rid of him.

There are plenty of Blues fans and neutral pundits who believe him. They are still in his thrall and regard him almost as highly as he regards himself. 



But Mourinho inherited a team who had reached the Champions League semi-final under Claudio Ranieri and he never bettered that achievement, despite unprecedented, profligate spending. In one of his three failed attempts to give Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich the European trophy he craved, Mourinho slipped up in the last 16.

In the last days of Mourinho’s Stamford Bridge reign, when his bloated ego had led to a breakdown of his relationship with Abramovich, a paltry crowd of 25,000 watched Chelsea stumble to a home draw against Norwegian underdogs Rosenborg in the Champions League. 

It was Avram Grant – too nice a bloke to follow Mourinho’s extravagantly outrageous act with any real conviction – who reached the final of the Champions League and it was only John Terry’s penalty blunder which led to defeat in Moscow. 

 
      

Mourinho is meticulous at arranging training sessions and outstanding at organising his teams defensively. Some of that attention to detail would not have gone amiss on Sunday, it is true.

But the delusion that Mourinho was a tactical genius does not fool those who can remember that, when a goal was needed, his best move used to be to send Robert Huth, or some other big lump, into the box and sling high balls at him.

Mourinho’s record was excellent and, of course, none of the defeats was his fault. Nothing ever was. He believes his tenure to be an unblemished success. That does not mean we have to believe it.

