Arsenal pushed through the £15million signing of Andrei Arshavin last night, almost 24 hours after the transfer window was supposed to have shut.

There will be outrage at rival clubs that the rules have been bent so that Arsenal could get their man. The deal was not rubber-stamped until 4.5pm yesterday. The deadline was 5pm the night before.

Arsenal maintained all the formalities were completed on time and that it just took almost an entire day to check them.

there was a “slight issue” with two of the forms and Yet according to an insider at the Premier League Zenit St Petersburg did not send their documents to the FA in time.


 

In other words, it was all a messy fudge because the desire to get a world-class player into the Premier League outweighed any wish to follow the letter of international rules.

The Arshavin deal was not the first time that the window has been wedged open longer than was strictly correct.

Benjani’s move from Portsmouth to Manchester City a year ago was not rubber-stamped until four days after the deadline. 

And, privately, officials admitted that Arshavin’s deal was not the last one to be completed. Others were being finished late amid secrecy.

      

Arshavin was bemused, as was his Russian representative Dennis Lachter, who said: “In 16 years this has been the most difficult transfer ever.”

Arsenal had been in talks with Zenit St Petersburg for all of January, yet he did not fly to London until Sunday night, the day before the deadline.

He completed a successful medical, agreed terms, signed on the dotted line on Monday, and trained with Arsenal yesterday morning.

But then news of the delay filtered through and he sat with his English agent, Phil Smith, and club officials while the clock counted down on a second day.

Eventually, he was told he was, indeed, an Arsenal player and then dashed off to catch a flight back to Russia to apply for a work permit.

He will jet back to London on Friday but, because the Russian season ended in November, he is not match-fit and so there is little possibility of him being involved in Sunday’s derby at Tottenham.

One of the reasons for the delay in the Russian’s transfer was the snow in London on Monday. It disrupted transport and left both the FA and the Premier League short-staffed.

At least it made Arshavin feel at home. He said: “I see the weather is like my country. I feel like I am in St Petersburg.

“I may need just a week to get fit. I’m happy now. I will do my best.” 

