That summed up his final years in the white shirt: he conned people. 

Fans believed the act, as he chugged about looking like an England centre-forward, only slower.

But he was a busted flush long before he realised he could not get away with it any longer. 

When he announced that he was going to work “in the media” I hoped he would interview people who were as unco-operative as he had been, but he opted for the Match of the Day sofa, and again that summed him up – taking the comfy option.

Well, that was what I thought until he became manager of Newcastle two days before they played Chelsea. 

A more calculating man would have waited at least until that fixture was out of the way, but it is apparent that Shearer really does care about the club. 

He is risking his reputation to try to stave off relegation. I was wrong about him. 

He has done a brave and selfless thing. And when he fails to keep Newcatle out of the Championship, their fans will have a chance to show that I am wrong about all that “special club, special people” tosh. 

It was summed up on Match of the Day Two by the local paper’s chief sports writer, Lee Ryder, who said: “No disrespect to them (sic) places but we don’t want to be going to Plymouth, Blackpool and Barnsley.” 

Well, actually Plymouth is a great away trip. There’s an excellent Chinese restaurant on the Ho. 

 

  

Blackpool has a bar with large-screen TVs right next to the away end and at Barnsley stewards and other staff are especially helpful and friendly. 

You see, there are decent clubs with genuine fans in the Football League and great entertainment. 

But relegation from the Premier League is a financial calamity. At Newcastle it of all the big earners that could spark a spiral of decline. 

Look at the bottom of the Championship and see how easy it is to keep on falling. 

Someone in the North- east assured me last night that there will be plenty of bare-chested fans following the club, however low they plummet.
 
If so, it still will not make them “special” because Leeds, Manchester City and Nottingham Forest all took a massive followings on their journey down the divisions. 

But it would prove that the self-styled Geordie Nation are more than the preposterously self-regarding narcissists their constant boasts make them appear. 


