CAN Fabio Capello see properly through those glasses?

It is a fair question because he continues to ignore Robert Green.

England coach Capello was at Upton Park to see West Ham goalkeeper Green produce a faultless display. 

Yet less than three hours after striding away from the match and into his waiting limousine, Capello omitted Green from his squad, then overlooked him again yesterday after Joe Hart pulled out injured.

Capello’s insistence he only picks players in form will ring hollow to Green, who won his duel with Jermain Defoe.
On three occasions, Green’s anticipation, speed of reaction and athleticism denied Defoe goals. He also more than matched the form of David James, who had a couple of his walkabout moments. 

And Green will have noted that Portsmouth took off striker Peter Crouch after 75 largely ineffectual minutes. 
Yet James, Defoe and Crouch are all in the party for the friendly in Berlin. So is Hart’s replacement Paul Robinson, whose flap at a cross allowed Sunderland to equalise at Ewood Park on Saturday. 

Green won his solitary England cap in June 2005, when he went on as a substitute in a friendly victory over Colombia.

He was set to go to the 2006 World Cup but ruptured his groin in a B international that year and has not played for England since.

 

Now Green, 28, finds himself behind 23-year-old Scott Carson of West Brom and Manchester City’s Hart, 21, as well as 38-year-old James, and now Robinson, 29.

Green, though, said: “It is motivation enough for me to do well for West Ham. If an England call comes, it comes.” West Ham manager Gianfranco Zola said: “Robert played like an international goalkeeper. But it’s not down to me to judge. Capello knows what to do better than me. To be in the national team you have to perform at high levels all the time, week-in, week-out.”

Portsmouth manager Tony Adams said: “Their goalkeeper pulled off some unbelievable saves, some fantastic one-on-ones. On another day Jermain would have scored a hat-trick.” 

Green’s performance secured West Ham’s first clean sheet in 27 games, but he has been playing behind a porous defence, whose lack of organisation was again apparent against Pompey.

One could not help but think that a side led by Harry Redknapp would have spotted and exploited that vulnerability. Under Adams, they seemed content to take a single point.

Nobody is quite sure what to make of Adams yet as a Premier League manager.

As a player he was an archetypal, fist-clenching, up-and-at-them leader, but these days he sees himself as a philosopher, favouring quietness and stillness.

He watched most of the match slumped low in his seat in the technical area, legs crossed like a chap watching a dull film on TV. And when he talks you can often catch echoes of the therapy he has had since giving up alcohol.

After this match, for instance, he spoke about his ability to know how others feel because he knows himself. Zola, 
meanwhile began with three forwards – Craig Bellamy, Carlton Cole and Freddie Sears – but they attacked on such a narrow front that the visiting defence was seldom ruffled. 

So he took off Sears and sent on Matthew Etherington to provide some width, but Etherington showed a marked reluctance to run at opponents and a promising match fizzled out into a stalemate. 

