HERE’S a statistic for you – this weekend was the first in 86 years that England’s top four clubs failed to score.

That arcane fact is evidence that, this season, none of the big four has yet hit barnstorming form.

Since the Premier League began 16 years ago, we have always had one – and sometimes two – teams who have been much better than the rest. The title has been determined, mostly, by the results the big four have achieved against each other.

This campaign, leaders Chelsea have dropped nine points at Stamford Bridge. Saturday’s goalless match against Newcastle was their second home draw against a club in the bottom segment.

Liverpool are mounting their most convincing challenge since the Premier League began, but they too have recorded goalless home games against two clubs – Stoke and now Fulham – who regarded those results as remarkable.

Manchester United are waiting for Cristiano Ronaldo to recapture the pace and poise which made him an irresistible force last season and Arsenal, who were dislodged from the top four by imploding at Manchester City – well, I won’t intrude on private grief.

Chelsea’s case study is intriguing, because they appear to be paying the price for the change of personnel and tactics which followed the departure of Jose Mourinho.
  

His Chelsea teams used to wear down opponents or batter down defences with a direct approach. Luiz Felipe Scolari’s men try to pass their way around the opposition, but there is little room to do so when those opponents are reluctant to leave their own half. That point is also made by Chelsea’s away form. Home teams feel obliged to attack and so leave space for Chelsea to exploit – and Scolari’s team have not dropped a single point on their travels.

There is another noticeable difference at Chelsea since Scolari took over. They have obviously had a PR makeover and, while not winning all their matches, are winning friends.

Scolari took the blame for his team’s inability to unpick Newcastle’s defence. He refused to criticise the visitors at all and had no quibble with any refereeing decisions.

Mourinho was  always belligerently pugnacious and never acknowledged any flaws of his own. He would have lambasted Newcastle for “parking a bus in their goalmouth”. Mourinho has been up to his old tricks in Italy. His Inter Milan beat Juventus this weekend, but Mourinho complained about Juve’s negative tactics and insulted their coach, his Chelsea predecessor Claudio Ranieri, calling him too old and criticising his English.

Well, Scolari’s language skills are not great, but his English vocabulary has words and phrases which Mourinho never mastered, such as “sorry” and “it was my fault”.

Newcastle’s Joe Kinnear doesn’t believe in makeovers. He is an unreconstructed Eighties manager, from his hair to his profanities, but his club’s fans have undergone a profound change of attitude. They used to crave a more open, adventurous style, as promised by Kevin Keegan.

Yet Kinnear told Michael Owen to play almost as an extra midfielder, filled his penalty area with bodies, and sent the Geordie army home happy.

Chelsea did look listless, though. Deco appeared particularly weary after playing for Portugal in Brazil and only arriving back in England late on Thursday.

How fortunate for Chelsea, then, that Frank Lampard, Ashley Cole and Joe Cole told England, like United’s Wayne Rooney, that they were injured in midweek, yet played three days later for their clubs.

