A YEAR ago Arsenal unveiled a bust of Arsene Wenger inside the directors’ entrance of the Emirates stadium. Chairman Peter Hill-Wood said it was an “exact replica” of the one of Herbert Chapman, which is odd, because you would have expected it to look like Wenger.

But then there are too many people associated with Arsenal who do not recognise Wenger’s uniqueness.

Oh yes, he has won things and changed the culture and so-on, they say blithely, but they want him out now.

So let’s play along with that preposterous idea for a moment. Let’s imagine that a club which sacked the chief executive who masterminded their new stadium could perform a second deed of crass ingratitude and ease Wenger to one side.

Perhaps he could be given some sinecure within the club and grateful thanks and all that, but kept out of the decision making during the week and the technical area on match days.

Then what? Or more importantly, then who?

It is when you try to consider who might be the next Arsenal manager that you begin to realise that nobody would be able to pick up and run with the baton Wenger has carried for 12 years.

There are considerable problems this season. If Arsenal do not qualify for the Champions League next term, then the finances could start to unravel.

But sacking Wenger is the daftest idea ever proposed in a game which has an alarming propensity for doing barmy things. But rather astonishingly and reprehensibly, it is not just a recent suggestion.

I have heard it countless times. In January 2006, an Arsenal fanzine said Wenger had lost the plot and lambasted him for persisting with Thierry Henry “who is playing so badly”.

 


I bought the magazine on my way to a game in which Arsenal thumped Middlesbrough 7-0 and Henry scored a sublime hat-trick. Arsenal reached the Champions League final that season.

And when we consider the current charges against the Gunners’ boss, let’s not accept the self-serving nonsense from William Gallas.

He accuses Arsenal’s young players of not being brave enough. Well they were brave enough to beat Fenerbahce in Turkey this month and courageous enough to mix it with Manchester United in the best game of the season.

And I contend that the Arsenal kids show real bravery in every game in which they keep taking people on and keep passing the ball when opponents are trying to kick and foul.

Yet sadly, every time Arsenal lose a game too many deluded fans with short memories and tiny minds opine: “Arsene’s done great – don’t get me wrong – but it is time for someone else”.

I repeat: “Who?”


