LIVERPOOL should hold fire on their scorn about this week’s little pantomime involving Steven Gerrard. 

On Saturday night they told us he had a torn adductor muscle, but he was summoned to England’s Hertfordshire hotel so the FA staff could examine him.

Lo and behold, they discovered he had a torn adductor muscle, and sent him back.

Why was he treated like the naughty schoolboy who had tried to bunk off PE? Because he has previous as a truant.
Last season Gerrard broke a toe, but managed to play for Liverpool against Chelsea before missing England’s Wembley friendly against Germany three days later. 

Frank Lampard also had a broken toe but he played at Anfield, then turned up for England, had an injection and scored for his country.

This season Gerrard had an operation on his groin at a time which was disappointing for England but convenient for Liverpool. The surgery prevented him playing in the World Cup qualifiers against Andorra and Croatia. 

But, three days after the second of those fixtures, he was able to go on as a substitute in Liverpool’s victory over Manchester United.

Is there anyone who believes he will not play in the Champions League against Marseille a week tomorrow?

We should not be surprised that an American-owned club managed by a Spaniard are disdainful about England, but we are entitled to wonder how much Gerrard cares about playing for his country.

All right, he has got a note from the doctor, but he does whinge about not playing in his preferred position for England and his big mate, Jamie Carragher, has been very dismissive about the Three Lions.

 


This is not an anti-Liverpool diatribe, because the club at the other end of the M62 need no lessons on withdrawing players.  Manchester United’s decision to pull out Rio Ferdinand and Wayne Rooney provoked knowing nods. 

Rooney not only has a chest infection, but also a calf strain. Poor lamb. I wonder if he will shrug it off in time for Saturday’s tricky fixture at Aston Villa?

Two thoughts occur. The first is: welcome to England, Signor Capello.

The second is: contrast all this with the attitude of David Beckham, who is always prepared to fly 11,000-mile round trips for cameo roles whenever England want him.
