THE fans of the Premier League’s bottom club sing a song. “Tottenham till I die!” they yell. “I’m Tottenham till I die”. 

They do not sing “Tottenham till people laugh at us”, nor “Tottenham till we have the worst start in our history”. So a degree of loyalty might be expected at the moment and, to their credit, many of those suffering fans are showing it to manager Juande Ramos, as they did a year ago to Martin Jol.

Spurs supporters used to be the most irksomely arrogant in the land, banging on all the time about dimlyremembered glory days and insisting, against all the evidence, that theirs was “a big club”.

But 12 months ago this week, during a UEFA Cup game, reports swept around their ground that Jol had been sacked. Supporters chanted his name and continued to do so as their team lost the match, although it didn’t stop Jol being dismissed.

A year later, Spurs are imploding, their defeat at Stoke self-inflicted.

It included goalkeeper Heurelho Gomes putting Vedran Corluka in hospital and unforgivably reckless challenges by two defenders who were sent off to give Spurs as many red cards that day as they have points.

Yet, when “One day” Ramos (as in “One day we’ll win”) trudged away at the finish, Tottenham fans gave him a round of applause. 

Like the support for Jol a year earlier, it was sympathy for a dead man walking. Like a year ago, it will not prevent the manager being sacked.

It was not Ramos’s idea to flog Robbie Keane and then, at 11.35pm on deadline day, to sell Dimitar Berbatov. 

 

But Ramos cannot escape some blame for Tottenham’s plight. His tactics have been flawed – why, for instance pick a holding midfield player against Stoke, who bypass the midfield?

And he has not been robust enough in his leadership. It is all very well standing stoically with brooding brow as his team loses, but Ramos has not been able to communicate whatever defiance he feels. 

His faltering, pidgin English is mocked behind his back in the dressing room. Some of the players are culpable as well. Has a big-name, big-headed player ever made less impact than David Bentley?

And, as many Spurs fans are pointing out, chairman Daniel Levy and director of football Damien Comolli are the architect and builder of the rickety structure which is collapsing so calamitously.

One of the biggest culprits has already left the sinking ship, however. Paul Kemsley quit as vice-chairman of Spurs a week before Jol’s sacking, but his fingerprints were all over that crime.

In August 2007, when Tottenham fans were still chuffed about finishing fifth in each of the two previous years, Kemsley and club secretary John Alexander met Ramos and his agent at an hotel in Spain. When a photograph of the meeting was published, Spurs protested they had only been trying to learn about how continental clubs were run. 

They had not made any approach to Ramos. Goodness, no. Certainly not. 

Ramos claimed otherwise. He said Spurs had made him a dizzying offer. You decide which version you believe.
And, in the light of this summer’s protestations about Liverpool and Manchester United courting Keane and Berbatov, it is worth recalling that Ramos was under contract to Sevilla at the time that he took tapas with Tottenham.

Kemsley left eight weeks later “to concentrate on business interests in the USA” but he surfaced again in English football this season, advising a mate and business partner Mike Ashley at Newcastle.

A glance at the table will refresh your memory about conspicuous success in that venture.

Jol had been humiliated by Tottenham’s meeting with Ramos and was on borrowed time from the moment it took place. That time ran out when Spurs played Getafe in the UEFA Cup. 

During the game, Sky Sports News reported that Jol had been sacked. Fans inside the ground received phone calls and texts from mates who had seen the report. The last person to know was Jol.

He was told after the game. It was a particularly shoddy end to a prolonged period of tawdry behaviour by the Spurs hierarchy and behind it lay a couple of cliches that are usually trotted out by fans.

Spurs believed Jol had “taken the club as far as he could”. They felt someone else was needed to “take them to the next level”. And whoever replaces Ramos in the next few days or weeks will, indeed, take them to the next level: the Championship.

