WHEN Arsene Wenger returns to the training ground later this week after tomorrow’s European match, he should peer over the hedge.

Arsenal’s facility is next door to the less well-appointed pitches used by Watford and it might lift Wenger’s mood to consider the neighbours.

Only goal difference is keeping Watford out of the Championship’s relegation places and they are in the middle of an “everything must go” sale. 

They flogged their best players in the summer; they are trying to flog the entire club and yesterday they gave manager Aidy Boothroyd – not so long ago touted as the next big thing in management – his P45. Now that is a crisis.

Arsenal, meanwhile,  go into tomorrow’s Champions League fixture against Fenerbahce at the top of their group. In the Premier League, they are six points off the lead.


 

 

It is preposterous, as some have done this week, to portray them as a club in disarray, racked by angst. 

Yet, equally, it would be daft to pretend everything is going well. 

If Arsenal lose against Manchester United on Saturday, we can assume they will not be the champions this season and might not finish in a Champions League spot.

It is the Premier League defeats they have suffered already which should cause Wenger concern.

     

Normally, the so-called big four only lose to each other, with very occasional slip-ups elsewhere. But Arsenal have lost to Fulham, Hull and Stoke already.

Saturday’s reversal in the Potteries provoked the hackneyed complaint that they lack bottle for a physical battle, especially anywhere cold and a bit northern.

Certainly their defence could not cope with Rory Delap’s throw-ins.

Certainly they suffered when Ryan Shawcross kicked striker Emmanuel Adebayor off the pitch and when Delap’s cynical trip put England winger Theo Walcott on a stretcher and heading for the dressing room early.

But how sad that Arsenal’s defeat brought some people joy. The view that it served the poncey foreigners right is profoundly philistine. It is fair to point out the Gunners sometimes over-complicate the game and pass themselves into a cul-de-sac. 

It is true, as well, that their football is fragile – that when the passing is not perfect, they have no Plan B. 

But, for Heaven’s sake, let’s applaud Plan A. 

Let’s celebrate the fact that Wenger will always prefer a Cesc Fabregas to a Delap, will always believe that (the clue’s in the name) football is better when mostly played with the feet.

His players have often been ill-disciplined (as Robin van Persie was at Stoke), and he does not have a monopoly of good players or flowing passes.

But let us recognise that striving for purist perfection is a good thing within the Beautiful Game.

Please let’s not criticise Arsene’s Arsenal for not being clod-hoppers, or rejoice when clod-hoppers beat them.

