ROY Keane is continuing to plan for the future at Sunderland, despite his reported reluctance to agree a new contract. 



But if club officials think he has mellowed at all – because, for instance, he does not chew up referees and spit them out any more – they are mistaken. 



Roy remains his own man. He will decide in his own time and for his own reasons whether he wants to accept a new deal reputed to be worth £3million a year. Keane’s contract ends this season and chairman Niall Quinn is said to be frustrated at the lack of progress in discussions about a new one (although publicly, Quinn and Keane maintain there is no rush). 



Sunderland have backed their rookie manager by spending £80m on players since promotion. But now Keane thinks it might be time to consolidate rather than continually revamp the squad. 



He said: “My spending is certainly over in terms of bringing in six, seven or eight players every transfer window. We need to stabilise the club now and I am happy to do that.” 



That does not sound like someone about to skip town, but there is certainly enough independent spirit behind those scary eyes to keep those who must negotiate with Keane on their toes. 



 
  

For instance, Sunderland’s centre-backs, Danny Collins and Anton Ferdinand, were magnificent at Fulham, yet Nyron Nosworthy is likely to be recalled for Saturday’s derby against Newcastle. 



Keane was asked whether that would disappoint Collins. He replied, with a hint of menace: “I have no problem disappointing players. That’s my job. They disappoint me sometimes.” 



And when someone suggested Kieran Richardson had been outstanding, Keane was witheringly scornful. “I’d have to disagree,” he said. 



Richardson was unlucky not to have won it for Sunderland. First, his free-kick hit both posts before goalkeeper Mark Schwarzer deflected it on to one of the uprights for a second time. Then another Richardson free-kick sailed into the net but was disallowed because Pascal Chimbonda was backing into the wall. 



Before the kick was taken, Chimbonda had been grabbed somewhere painful by Jimmy Bullard, Fulham’s resident joker who is more Jimmy Dullard on current form, frequently taking timid options with his passing. He should find some film footage of the sublime Johnny Haynes, whose statue was unveiled before the game. 



Like Bullard, Haynes enjoyed a joke. He used to tell one about a pay rise he was once given. He was to get £60 a week during the season and £40 a week in the summer. 



Team-mate Maurice Cook went to see chairman Tommy Trinder and asked: “Why am I only getting £40 a week in the season and £20 in the summer?” Trinder replied: “Haynes is a better player than you.” But Cook countered: “Not in the summer, he’s not.” 

