AS TWO more Premier League clubs are put up for sale, the question is: Why would anyone buy Spurs at the moment? They will be a lot cheaper if they are relegated. 

Self-styled “super-agent” Pini Zahavi is in talks with an unnamed Asian billionaire about a takeover of Tottenham.

But Spurs remain bottom of the Premier League following yesterday’s defeat at Fratton Park and if Zahavi is drafting an advertisement, it will have to read: “One badly used club for sale; several careless owners.”

Portsmouth are also available, but they put two calamitous defeats behind them and boss Harry Redknapp said: “We’ve got debts but we’ve got some great assets – the players.”

Jermain Defoe, who was discarded by Tottenham last January, scored Pompey’s first goal from the penalty spot, although the visitors argued that they should have had a penalty of their own, before Peter Crouch added their second goal.

Spurs boss Juande Ramos said: “When things are going against you, nobody seems to help.”

That was a reference to referee Mike Dean but every struggling club has some hard-luck stories and the real condemnation of Tottenham yesterday was that Portsmouth did not have to play very well to beat them.

Redknapp’s side were smarting after conceding 10 goals in two games but he said: “I told them that everybody has a bad day at the office every now and again, that the defeats were just one of those things and that we have got a good group of players.”

Those players were well on top before they were awarded a penalty for handball by Jermaine Jenas.

 

As Defoe steadied himself to take the spot-kick, Tottenham fans behind the goal he was facing sang, “You’re Spurs and you know you are”. 

Defoe hit his right-footed drive crisply and beyond the dive of Heurelho Gomes – but was applauded by those same supporters for not celebrating.

Spurs claimed a penalty of their own after 54 minutes, when Aaron Lennon’s cross struck Lassana Diarra’s arm but, this time, Dean waved away the appeals.

With England coach Fabio Capello among those present to appreciate him, Defoe played with elan.

His confidence has clearly benefited from being selected whenever fit – just as it was eroded damagingly by being consigned to the subs’ bench so often when he was at Spurs.

Dimitar Berbatov and Robbie Keane, who were ahead of him in the queue for attacking places at White Hart Lane, have now left, of course, and Tottenham’s lamentable lack of forward options is one of their core weaknesses.

Roman Pavlyuchenko, their £13.8million signing in late August, operated as a lone striker and, although his movement was intelligent, he looked lightweight against Pompey’s central defenders.

And he did very little to stifle the suggestion that he might be the new Sergei Rebrov, who scored just 10 goals in four years at Spurs.

When Pavlyuchenko was taken off after 73 minutes and replaced by Darren Bent, the Tottenham fans chanted, “You don’t know what you’re doing” at Ramos, because the change still left their team with only one striker – and by then they were two goals down and sinking.

Portsmouth’s second goal arrived after 67 minutes, when Defoe set up Armand Traore, whose shot was blocked but flew up into the air.

Crouch, trying to earn a recall from Capello, gleefully nodded the ball into the empty net for his first Premier League goal since his £9m arrival from Liverpool.

Diarra, who had been the oil which kept the Portsmouth engines purring, got himself sent off for two yellow cards – both for unnecessary and rash challenges.

But Portsmouth were cruising long before Defoe was replaced after 89 minutes. He got the predictable and deserved ovation from the home fans but Tottenham fans clapped as well as he left the pitch.

Sadly, however, those same Spurs fans berated their former captain Sol Campbell throughout the match, even though his defection from them down the road to Arsenal is now seven years old.

And Redknapp added: “Players should not be called names and get filthy abuse from supporters. There were children here.”

