WHAT image comes to mind when you think of David Beckham? There are several jostling for prominence in my memory.

I recall England’s 5-1 triumph in Germany in 2001, when his irresistible determination became a force of nature. 

There was that improbable, ­exhilarating last-gasp winner against Greece at Old Trafford and I was lifted out of my seat in the Sapporo Dome in Japan by sheer exultation when Beckham scored a penalty against Argentina in the 2002 World Cup.

But I recall as well watching him trudging off after being sent off in the 1998 finals and I have a mental picture of him sobbing in self-pity in 2006 after another flawed World Cup campaign.

Now my collection of Beckham memories includes a more recent image. It is of his face melting into a warm smile as he shook hands with Theo Walcott in the 4-1 win over Croatia in Zagreb.

Walcott had taken Beckham’s place in the starting line-up, then scored a hat-trick – which meant Beckham might never get his No7 shirt back. 

He eventually came on for six minutes, replacing Walcott. Yet as the new kid jogged off, Beckham beamed, genuinely delighted for the young player and their country. In Germany two summers ago, Beckham’s celebrity eclipsed England’s attempt to win the World Cup and some doubted he would ever be ­content with a role that did not put him at centre stage. 

Yet we now know that, before the game in Croatia, he made a point of encouraging Walcott.


 
This weekend, England boss Fabio Capello will name his squad for World Cup ­qualifiers at Wembley against both Kazakhstan and Belarus. Beckham will probably be included, but there must be doubts about whether his collection of 105 caps will get much bigger.

Normally there is pathos when the ­powers of good players begin to dim but, although we are watching the lingering embers of his  international career, they are ­illuminating what has gone before. Now we know that all he ever wanted was for England to do well. The ­magnanimity with which he acknowledged and ­celebrated Walcott’s ­emergence as England’s new hope was heartfelt and heartwarming. 

The time fast is approaching when England must discard Beckham the footballer. When it comes, we should salute a decent man and an extra-­ordinary patriot.

