Those of us who saw him often during the 21 years of his playing career remember him frequently covered in blood. Sometimes it was his own. But of all his battles, none was so intensely challenging as the 15 months he has spent managing Luton Town.

When Harford replaced Kevin Blackwell at the start of 2008, Luton were in administration. They could not sign any players, had been docked 10 points and were doomed to relegation from League One.

Then, in the close season, as Harford prepared for life in the league’s bottom division, he learnt that Luton were to suffer a points deduction for the second successive campaign.

The FA deducted 10 points because of secret payments to agents. The Football League then deducted an additional 20 points because Luton had come out of administration without agreeing to pay debts to other clubs in full. The combined 30-point penalty was the biggest in League history.

Five months of the season passed before the Bedfordshire club clawed their way to a points total of zero. So Luton’s Wembley date tomorrow, against Scunthorpe in the final of the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy, will provide some much-needed respite.

Harford said: “Our situation has been hard to handle mentally; much tougher than I expected. You would win a game and then look at the table and see Luton at the bottom of the entire league, so far behind everyone else. It was hard.

“But the players just came in every day, got on with training and never moaned. I have the utmost respect for them. Many of them joined us after they knew about the 30-point deduction. They were putting their careers on the line because they knew we were in a fight not to go into non-League football.



“Wembley is a bit of payback. The fans deserve to see their team play at Wembley. They turn up week in and week out, and don’t have any say how their club is run. It has been run poorly over the last four or five years, and that is why we are in this situation. But the fans just turn up and hand over their money to support the team.

“I’m also delighted for the players. Playing at Wembley is a great thing for a footballer and, with the greatest respect to the lads at Luton, this might be the only chance for many of them. Then there is the “Luton Town 2020” consortium, who have worked tirelessly for months to get the club back on a level footing. Wembley is a little reward for those people as well.”

Harford’s own favourite Wembley memory is of winning one of his two England caps. He recalled: “I stood on the halfway line at Wembley for a friendly against Denmark and I kicked off, knocking the ball to Peter Beardlsey. At that moment I thought, ‘It doesn’t get much better than this’.”

There were also four Wembley appearances for Luton. In 1988 he scored as Luton lost 4-1 to Reading in the Simod Cup final and played when Luton lost to Manchester United in a tournament celebrating the Football League’s centenary.

The following month Harford was part of the team that won the League Cup by beating Arsenal and, the next season, he was Luton’s scorer again when the holders were beaten 3-1 by Nottingham Forest.

Harford used a video of the Arsenal game to motivate the team this season. He said: “Against Arsenal we went 1-0 up, conceded a couple of goals and then took a battering. A different team might have conceded five or six to Arsenal that day, but we hung in and dug in. We got two late goals and won 3-2. It was the mentality of the squad which got us through.”

That squad included Luton icons Ricky Hill and Steve Foster, but it is Harford who regularly wins “greatest ever” polls among the club’s fans and this is his fifth stint at the club. 

David Pleat bought him twice and he scored on both “debuts”. Later he was assistant manager to Joe Kinnear and director of football for Mike Newell. Now it is Harford’s show, and if that means having to try to win the Blue Square Premier next season, then he is ready for that scrap. He has the face to prove it. ‘It has been tougher than I expected’ on how Luton Town’s manager is showing the same no-nonsense qualities that marked his playing days


