THERE are only 18 shopping days left until the transfer window slams shut – but nobody is asking “Why?”

Transfer windows, brought to you by that buffoon Sepp Blatter, were a mistaken response to a misinterpretation of European law. Yet we all take the bonkers abomination for granted.

The windows cause a frenzied, inflated market. They drive some clubs close to penury. They are a charter for wasters. Oh, and they are part of the reason why the England football team is pants.

The mess began seven years ago when the European Commission prompted changes to rules about players’ contracts and transfer fees and FIFA became involved – always bad news.

Worried that the new rules might lead to a free-for-all, FIFA restricted transfers to two ‘windows’ each year.

But the EC was concerned only about moves between member states. FIFA could have allowed transfers between English clubs to have continued unhindered.

With European deals restricted to the windows, English clubs could have carried on buying and selling English players during the rest of the season. More Englishmen would have gone to top clubs. Hey presto, a better England team.

But FIFA president Blatter, a crazed empire-builder, blithely decreed that everyone on the planet must abide by his 
windows.

One of the first clubs to suffer were Ipswich. As a Norwich fan, normally I would consider anything that damaged them to be a good thing, but on this occasion I was on their side.


 
When they were relegated from the Premier League in 2002 they held a fire-sale of players, as you do. But the window closed before they could unload enough. They went into administration.

Another club to suffer from window pain were Aston Villa. Turkish defender Alpay asked to leave but the window was shut. So he stayed at Villa Park, unmotivated and unwanted until they cancelled his contract.

And so it has continued, year after year. Now all clubs have larger numbers on their payrolls. Instead of being able to buy reinforcements when required, they must stock their squads full in August.

Managers desperate to sign someone – anyone – before the window closes, pay over the odds.

The imbecilic system is particularly harsh on clubs who are promoted to the Premier League, who have only the 
summer to secure players for the new season and new challenge. Often they make hurried, poor purchases.

Then clubs are stuck with players they cannot afford or don’t want, while players ossify at clubs they would like to leave.

It is all mad. It is almost certainly an illegal restraint of trade. Imagine telling any other business that it can only hire and fire staff during the summer and in January.

Still, it has made Sepp happy.

