A desperate club have appointed a desperate man. Joe Kinnear has taken the job nobody else wanted, because he could not get any other job.


But if a requisite for the task is to understand its magnitude, then he started well. In his first public statement as Newcastle’s interim manager yesterday, Kinnear reached instinctively for a cliched platitude and got something absolutely right.


“It will be a massive challenge,” he said. It certainly will. 



When the former Tottenham full-back takes over at the start of next week, he will face precisely the same fundamental problem as the former Spurs full-back he is replacing. 



Chris Hughton, who has been caretaker manager since Kevin Keegan quit, is a decent man and a decent coach, but he has been undermined by the uncertainty at the club, having no power or influence. 



Similarly, when Kinnear bowls into the Darsley Park training ground, Jonas Guitierrez, Fabrizio Coloccini, Xisco and the rest will know that he is just another stop-gap. 
 




And if, at half-time of the first defeat of Kinnear’s short stay, he loses his temper and shouts and threatens them, they will take no notice at all. 



According to Kinnear, when Ashley telephoned him yesterday morning to offer him the job, it was made clear the club is likely to be sold before the end of October and the prospective new owners want to install Kevin Keegan and Alan Shearer as a managerial double act. 



One problem with that notion is that Keegan and Shearer are not friends. Another reason the so-called dream ticket might turn into a nightmare is that appointing one or both Toon idols would be a populist gesture, and not what is needed. 



Still, if Keegan was watching the news last night and saw that bloke who flew across the Channel with a jet engine strapped to his back, he is probably planning to borrow it to make his grand entrance at St James’ Park. It will be Keegan’s fourth coming I think, but I may have lost count. 



Yesterday’s news that striker Obafemi Martins will be out of action for up to six weeks with a knee injury means that Kinnear has a paper-thin squad to work with. 



According to Kinnear, he did not speak to executive director (football) Dennis Wise before taking the job. But Wise must have been consulted by Ashley. It is easy to imagine Wise checking his shortlist of mates, coming up with Terry Venables and, when that didn’t work, turning to Kinnear. 



Or it is possible that Ashely was counselled by Paul Kemsley again. It was Kemsley who helped persuade Ashley to have an executive director (football), and a vice-president (player recruitment). Kemsley came up with a similar structure when he was a director at Tottenham, with little conspicuous success. 



Kinnear has a reputation as a “good organiser”. In other words, he could set up a team to do specific things effectively.  



Yet he usually organised his teams to play in a way that Newcastle’s highly critical fans abhor – with direct tactics and an over-reliance on physicality – and he has not worked in football since ending an unsuccesful stint at Nottingham Forest nearly four years ago. 



He must have wondered if he would ever get another football job. He might soon wish he hadn’t. 


