THE first replica Newcastle shirt that Mike Ashley bought had ‘Smith 17’ on the back, in tribute to Alan Smith.

This week Ashley’s club tried to flog Smith to Everton because his wages are too high.

By then, Ashley had a shirt with ‘KING KEV 1’ on the back. You could see it as he scuttled out five minutes before the end of Saturday’s overwhelming defeat at Arsenal.

Ashley lives only 28 miles from the Emirates. Real fans had 10 times as far to travel home to Newcastle, but they stayed to the bitter end. 

Now they are ­wondering what Ashley will have on  his next shirt, because whoever has his name sewn on the back gets stitched up.

When ‘King Kev’  became manager again at St James’ Park eight short months ago, I wrote that it was a foolish appointment. It ­perpetuated the myth that Newcastle are a special club, ­preordained to succeed.

But although Newcastle will always be hamstrung by the ridiculously overblown self-regard of their fans, Keegan has not been allowed a proper stab at the job. That is what led to yesterday’s showdown.

Ashley gave Dennis Wise a fat salary, a London office, the title executive director ­(football) and a place in an unnecessarily complicated chain of command above Keegan. 

And increasingly, Ashley moaned that footballers are overpaid. Really? Everyone has known that for a decade. It is too late to moan about it after you’ve bought a club – and slashing the wage bill is diametrically opposed to the ambition of competing in the Premier League. 

 


Selling James Milner to Aston Villa last week made business sense, but not football sense.

An alarmingly similar scenario is unfolding at West Ham. There, Eggert Magnusson arrived ­waving a club scarf. But the Gollum lookalike was only the frontman for the real owners.

Now, less than two years later, he has gone. 

The owners have installed ‘technical director’ Gianluca Nanni to complicate life for ­manager Alan Curbishley and have sold players Curbishley wanted to keep. 

Meanwhile, over at Eastlands, manager Mark Hughes might have less reason to celebrate Manchester City’s new wealth than some imagine. When all the drama of transfer deadline day was ­unfolding, Hughes was playing golf. He had ­little to do with it all.

You see, the very rich men who have been buying our clubs are following the example of Roman Abramovich. And they are all copying his interfering ­attitude. They’ve bought clubs as playthings, and they want to play.

The big difference for Ashley is that he gets his enjoyment from mixing with the fans, pretending he is one of the lads.

He won’t dare do that any more if Keegan does not return to his desk this morning. In those circumstances it wouldn’t matter what Ashley puts on his next shirt. The ­supporters just want to see the back of him.

