THE debate has moved on this week. Internet discussion of what Spurs fans sang about Sol Campbell now centres on nuances of meaning.

Was the reference to him hanging from a tree an allusion to racist lynchings or the suicide of Judas Iscariot? Was the line about him dying with HIV necessarily homophobic?

The song, delivered with gusto during a match at Portsmouth, is being dissected as if it were a Shakespearean sonnet because apologists for those who sang it want to believe it wasn’t all that bad really. 

We huff and puff with outrage when Croatian fans make monkey noises at Emile Heskey. We protest with indignation when their national FA is “punished” with a laughably small fine.But when a footballer is traduced in this country, some people want to believe that it was just a bit of badinage.

So let’s be clear about this. A certain amount of strongly worded banter is part of the catharsis of going to a football match, but there is a difference between passion and poison.

Forget subtle differences in interpretation and remember that it was debasing and shameful.

Let’s trash the argument prevailing on internet message boards that players get paid a fortune and so should be able to cope with a rude song. Campbell did cope with it, but he shouldn’t have to. 

And, please, can we stop blaming the police, stewards or the FA? Blame Tottenham. Their fans have been vicious towards Campbell for seven years. They have three other chants about him which are indisputably homophobic.

Spurs fans are subjected to foul anti-semitism around the country, but that does not excuse their own knuckle-draggers. 


They also have at least four grotesque songs defaming Arsene Wenger as a homosexual paedophile. 

The club could and should have used CCTV to identify and ban ringleaders long ago.

And there is another group of people who must take the blame – the decent, normally civilised folk who support Tottenham and who have smiled indulgently when this vile stuff is sung.

In the safety provided by strict segregation, cowards can suspend the rules of civilised behaviour – but those who silently condone them are craven as well. 

Worse still, some who mean no harm join in out of some profoundly misguided tribal loyalty. And, have no doubt about this, at Portsmouth, a thousand or so did join in. Contemptible behaviour occurs at every ground in the country. 

But the baiting of Campbell was especially evil and decent Spurs fans are to blame, because by accepting it they made it seem acceptable. At the moment, they are fretting about the decline of their team. They should pause 
and think about their own degradation.

