TOTTENHAM manager Juande Ramos said last night he could lose his job because of the club’s worst start to a season for 53 years.

Spurs were left stranded at the bottom of the Premier League by a 2-0 defeat at Portsmouth. 

And when Ramos was asked whether he expected to survive, he could only say: “That is for someone else to decide. 

"It is not down to me. We have a board, and a chairman who decide those sort of things.” Spurs, the only club without a Premier League victory this season, have taken just two points from the first six fixtures.

They had twice as many points at the same stage last season, yet that got Martin Jol the sack and led to the appointment of Sevilla boss Ramos, 53.

To add to Ramos’ discomfort, Jol is now in charge at Hamburg, who won again on Saturday and lead the German Bundesliga.

The manner of Tottenham’s defeat yesterday also heaped humiliation on Ramos.

Portsmouth had conceded 10 goals in their previous two matches but eased to victory with goals from Jermain Defoe and Peter Crouch. Defoe left Spurs last January because the London club thought Ramos did not need him.

Yesterday the England striker converted a penalty and was applauded by Spurs fans for not celebrating.

Then, when he was substituted two minutes from the end, the away supporters joined in the ovation for him.


 
But they taunted Spaniard Ramos with “You don’t know what you’re doing” for playing with only one forward.

The game was played in extraordinary circumstances – because before kick-off it was revealed that both clubs are for sale.

Although Tottenham’s media team denied reports that the club could be bought by an unnamed Asian billionaire, based in Singapore, the Daily Express was told that the takeover talks are taking place. 

They are being brokered by super-agent Pini Zahavi, who masterminded Roman Abramovich’s purchase of Chelsea.

Chairman Daniel Levy has previously admitted he would listen to offers and values the club at about £400million.

Portsmouth tried to quell suggestions that Alexandre Gaydamak is seeking to sell the club – but conceded he would listen to the “right offer”.

The club have debts of £60million, a wage-bill of more than £50m, but have shelved plans for a new stadium.

