IN March 2002, Harry Redknapp picked his first Portsmouth team after taking over as ­manager.

Typically, he had already done a bit of business. Three days after being ­appointed, ’Arry drafted in a couple of defenders on loan. Two days later, he selected them both for that first match, at Preston. 

It is instructive to look carefully at the Portsmouth team that day. Of the 11 has-beens and hopefuls Redknapp cobbled together for his starting line-up, only four names ring a bell.

There was goalkeeper Dave Beasant, ­eking out a career which had seen better days. Gary O’Neill was beginning eight years in the first-team squad before joining Middlesbrough this time last year. 

Svetoslav Todorov, a Bulgarian striker, averaged better than a goal every three games for Pompey, but had major injuries. And then there was Nigel Quashie, a much-travelled but not much-noticed midfielder, last heard of at West Ham.

The rest – Scott Wilson, Mark Summerbell, Edward Howe, Lewis Buxton, Gary Brady, Jamie Vincent and Kevin Harper – were ­nondescripts. Portsmouth lost 2-0 in front of 16,832 supporters.

Yesterday, a lot more people watched Portsmouth contest the Community Shield. Of course, Redknapp spent the days before the match wheeling and dealing – but this time he was not shoring up his side by ­borrowing a couple of unknown defenders. 

He was working on deals including Tottenham’s sought-after French defender Younes Kaboul.

But Redknapp was frustrated that French international Lassana Diarra and Croatia’s Niko Kranjcar had missed much of Pompey’s pre-season preparation. They needed some additional time off after playing in Euro 2008 – not the sort of concern Redknapp had when he took over six years ago, when they were drifting about in the lower reaches of 

 

     
English football’s second tier.

My point is this: it is still possible to dream. Of course there are inequalities in the Premier League. At the top, the mega-rich ‘Big Four’ rake in Champions League cash and grow even more wealthy. At the bottom, the promoted clubs risk a season of being cannon fodder. And in between those extremes, there are clearly defined sub-­divisions; degrees of mediocrity.

But Portsmouth demonstrate that it is still possible to disrupt those entrenched positions. They have proved that, not only by the distance they have travelled under Redknapp and not only by ending the ‘Big Four’ monopoly to win the FA Cup last May, but also by the promise they offer this ­season. 

Redknapp’s collection of discards and wannabes will have a swashbuckling campaign and it is just about possible that they will gate-crash the top four.

And since Martin Jol was sacked for not doing so, we must assume that his ­replacement at Tottenham will also mount a convincing assault on the league’s summit. We might not know until the transfer window closes whether Juande Ramos has the ­players to match the club’s stated ambition, but at least his job description is absolutely clear. He must take Spurs into the top four.

Manchester City also sacked a manager for failing to infiltrate the Champions League places. But the money they spent paying up Sven-Goran Eriksson’s contract and hiring Mark Hughes was their last extravagance.

Since then, owner Thaksin Shinawatra has had other things on his mind. His wife was jailed and then bailed on corruption charges and a big tranche of his wealth is still frozen because of similar allegations against him. Unless new money arrives from new investors, City could implode.

Two other Cities will pray that they do. Stoke and Hull were promoted from the worst Championship since the Football League was cut adrift by the Premier League.

Since then, Hull have seen loan star striker Fraizer Campbell return to Old Trafford. At least Stoke have acquired a decent forward, Dave Kitson from Reading, but he might look increasingly ­forlorn as he pursues long balls and Stoke chase lost causes. 

The two promoted Cities will rely on ­others having calamitous campaigns. Wigan, Bolton, Sunderland and – now that their injury curse has started to claim victims again – West Ham are the likely candidates for a season of attrition. 

Fulham might be ready to put those ­concerns behind them. Their manager, Roy Hodgson, talks in such intricate sentences that you always worry he will lose his way among the sub-clauses. Similarly, his team eschew a straightforward approach. 

They believe it is possible to take on the big boys by playing passing football. After all, that is what Portsmouth have done.

