Do you crave the involvement of one or more of the superclubs, with the game’s finest practitioners carefully avoiding errors? Or can you glean enjoyment when lesser teams produce a match littered with mistakes? 



There are plenty of people who were scornful about the 187th final. While “environmental services” lorries (road sweepers, in case you wondered) waited in the side-streets near the stadium after the match, phone-ins were already receiving calls from people who thought the final was rubbish. 



They should have watched a little more discerningly. This match was decided by a catastrophic piece of goalkeeping while the man of the match was guilty of the most profligate miss the new Wembley has witnessed. However, there were many wonderful stories. 



The first two men to receive their medals had tales to tell, for instance. Sol Campbell and David James have been football flops and have suffered deeper, personal troubles. Yet there they were, exulting in a sporting triumph which proved the strength of the human spirit. 



Campbell, Portsmouth’s captain, is the only man to have represented England in six consecutive major tournaments – from Euro 96 to the World Cup in Germany a decade later. But in the season before the 2006 World Cup he had some sort of personal crisis. He went AWOL from Arsenal and did not resume training for 10 weeks. When he moved to Pompey, we assumed he wanted less stress. 
 

Goalkeeper James, four years older at 37, lived for a long while with the nickname Calamity James and with obsessions which bordered on illness. He joined Portsmouth because, at Manchester City, he was too far from his estranged wife and felt detached from his children. 



Now here they were at Wembley, Campbell planting a lingering kiss on the old cup and James reaching out to touch the sleeve of the man presenting it, Sir Bobby Robson. 



Footballing flotsam has become a speciality for Portsmouth manager Harry Redknapp. At West Ham he picked up Paolo Di Canio when nobody else would touch him and at Pompey he eked out extra performances from players such as Paul Merson and Teddy Sheringham whom others thought were long past their best. 



He has nurtured Campbell and James, both of whom made huge contributions to progress to the final and this glorious triumph. 



They were bulwarks of a defence that conceded only one FA Cup goal and a team which was outplayed for most of the semi-final by West Brom but never looked likely to lose to them. 



In the final, James’s anticipation twice rescued Portsmouth when Cardiff played balls behind Campbell. Then, in the second half when Cardiff threw men and balls into the Pompey box, Campbell’s masterclass in defensive heading involved getting height and distance on every clearance. 



Another of Redknapp’s rescue projects won the game. 



Kanu, 31, has had to overcome a serious heart defect, spent half his time at Arsenal as a substitute and became virtually a comedy conjurer at West Brom – where he is remembered for one astonishing miss when he lifted the ball up and over the goal from centimetres away. 



Against Cardiff he was at it again. With his back to goal, he controlled the ball with the outside of his right foot, turned away from his marker, sidestepped keeper Peter Enckelman – and rolled the ball against the post. But Enckelman favours toppling rather than diving and blocking rather than catching, and when he fell and spooned the ball into the air after 37 minutes, the loose-limbed Kanu scooped it into the net. 



Precocious Aaron Ramsey, who was preparing for GCSEs this time last year, fluffed his big exam at Wembley by taking too many touches instead of shooting before his Cardiff boss, David Jones, best summed up events. 



Before the game he said: “We are not here to lie down.” They did not. After the match he said: “We have proved that other teams can achieve what they think is impossible.” They did. 



So while Manchester United and Chelsea head for Moscow and their clash of the Titans, the millions who support less wealthy clubs can start to dream again. And men such as Campbell and James can point to the unique redemptive power of football and the true glory of its oldest knockout competition. 

