WHO do you hope to see relegated from the top flight? The question is on the pub debate agenda this week because of one of Saturday’s fixtures.

Derby ‘entertain’ Sunderland and when away supporters sing, “Going down, going down, going down”, the correct response from Derby masochists will be, “So are we, so are we, so are we”.

Derby are dead and waiting for the hearse, but their fans still have one, pathetic ambition. They want their team to be slightly less useless than Sunderland were two seasons ago.

That was when Sunderland broke their own appalling record as the worst team in Premier League history by gleaning a mere 15 points.

At their current rate, Derby will manage just 12. Their reward for promotion last May has been a season as cannon fodder. They have won only once – against Newcastle, which hardly counts.

Derby fans have responded with defiant loyalty. Attendances have held up and so have spirits. But they have been buoyed by the belief they will thrive in the Championship next season, which is a dangerous philosophy. There are 14 clubs stranded in that division who went down harbouring precisely the same delusion.

Fulham, perched just above rock-bottom Derby, are displaying the classic symptom of doomed clubs – paranoia. They are blaming referees for their defeats. It is what all relegated sides do. It is bunkum.

If Fulham go down, how far will they fall? They have sparse support and their owner, Mohamed Al Fayed, wearied of extravagant spending on players several seasons ago. It is difficult to imagine, given his other preoccupations, that he will have much enthusiasm for life back in the Football League.

Nor will Reading’s John Madejski, the man who gives his name to everything he builds but has been unable to find someone to name a price for his football club. He has been trying to flog Reading but will not find any takers if second-season syndrome hits home.
    

Having a reluctant chairman is bad enough for Reading, but the town was indifferent to them before last season and relegation will leave them with empty stands again.

Birmingham and Bolton are proof that you should be careful what you desire. Birmingham wanted a mega-rich foreign investor but months of talking – or, more frequently, not talking – to Hong Kong businessman Carson Yeung destabilised the club.

Bolton tired of Sam Allardyce and wanted a new manager to “take them to the next level” – much as Charlton did with Alan Curbishley, we know which level they reached.

Just above that desperate gaggle of stragglers come three North-east clubs and one from the North-west.

Sunderland and Middlesbrough are each letting an untried manager learn on the job, but Newcastle are proof experience doesn’t necessarily bring expertise. Kevin Keegan recently opined: “You are not going to win games unless you score goals.”

It is that level of incisive analysis which has filled the nation with schadenfreude at Newcastle’s haplessness.

Of all the decisions Alan Shearer has made in his lifetime, refusing to be part of the Keegan circus was surely the most sensible.

And here is a little secret about Wigan. Several Premier League chairmen are less than impressed with Dave Whelan’s ever-candid quotes for every occasion.

So there you have the runners and riders in the great relegation selling plate. But before you think the Premier League will be better without any of them, brace yourselves for what might replace them.

Stoke are top of the Championship and make Bolton look like Brazil. If Stoke go up, TV coverage will be lots of blokes looking up as the ball disappears out of the picture.

