JOSE MOURINHO had two long sessions with the media last week (now there’s a shock). In the first, with Italian writers and broadcasters, he insulted several managers in Serie A.

In the second, for English journalists, he bragged that if he had still been managing in the Premier League, Manchester United would not have had such a cushy time this season.

That was a shameless pitch for the Old Trafford job. So United should greet him tomorrow with this message: “Thanks for the application, but Sir Alex Ferguson is the real Special One and there is no chance at all of you succeeding him.”

Mourinho’s teams grind out wins, his idea of an attacking Plan B is to get some big lump like Robert Huth to contest long balls and United chief executive David Gill would not put up with his posturing and preening.

Ferguson’s United face Mourinho’s Inter Milan tomorrow in the first of a possible 19 games for the English club that could culminate in them winning so many trophies that nobody knows what to call the collection.

Is it a Quintuple? Or do you count the Community Shield? If so, is Sextuple a word? Whatever, we should recognise that we are watching something extraordinary, and that we will not see the like of Ferguson again, what with the financial imperatives and football’s insatiable demand for instant success. 

And here is another thought as he faces this season’s crescendo. The potential conclusion to United’s season is the FA Cup final on May 30.

If by then United have garnered an unprecedented haul of silverware, then Ferguson should use the media conference after the Wembley final to announce his retirement.

 


He has said he will not work on beyond 70. That milestone birthday falls in December 2011, so he has given himself two-and-a-half seasons after this. But it is unlikely he would walk out mid-campaign, so let’s say two seasons.

The second of those would be wrecked by speculation about his successor. That would damage United as much as when he announced his retirement in 2001-02 and then recanted.

Those close to him say he is newly enthused by the precocious young players in the United squad, but what better time to go than when the future looks secure?

And what is to be proved next season or the one after if United finish this campaign as champions of England, Europe and the world?

This May there could and should be an immediate vacancy at Old Trafford. Just not for Mourinho
