THE drama goes on in a momentous week. 

You’d have to be a dull soul not to be stirred by these five epic days encompassing two Champions League semi-finals and the potentially decisive Premier League game.

But when attention turns to Saturday’s domestic showdown between Chelsea and Manchester Untied, I’d invite you to pause for a moment to recall how you felt when the Blues won the title for the first time under Jose Mourinho in 2005.

Let me take you back. After the home game against Charlton (which, inevitably, Chelsea won 1-0), there were fireworks on the pitch and a huge knees-up in the stands, but Charlton scuttled away hurriedly.

They put tracksuits on over their kit and their coach sped away because police had warned them that the streets around Stamford Bridge would soon be clogged by partying supporters.

Addicks manager Alan Curbishley tarried just long enough to complain about Mourinho’s purchasing power and to add: “That’s the way it is going to be for the foreseeable future.”

Remember? We all believed then that we were witnessing the dawn of a long period of Chelsea supremacy.

Football had never seen spending on the scale of Roman Abramovich’s extravagance and we did not expect anyone to be able to compete.

Sure enough, Chelsea reeled off another title triumph in 2006, playing as imperiously as their manager behaved. 

 
They dropped only two points at home, amassed nine points more than their nearest rivals and recorded a goal difference of 50. The next season,  chief executive Peter Kenyon bragged that he expected his club to become the dominant force in world football within years – yet the cracks were already appearing. 

The relationship between Mourinho and Abramovich fractured and it was United who benefited. I remind you of that now because we tend to take Abramovich’s spree for granted now, as if it were commonplace. 

It was not and is not. It is unparalleled. And it is the context in which we should measure last year’s United triumph – and judge this season’s climax.

I contend that winning the league last season was Sir Alex Ferguson’s greatest achievement – all the more admirable because his team romped to the title with such elan – and without the snarling nastiness they had during the Nineties.

Yet this season’s United are better because, though Fergie has an indifferent overall record on transfers, the additions of Anderson, Nani, Owen Hargreaves and Carlos Tevez have added significantly. And so we can see now that Abramovich’s largesse not only transformed Chelsea. It forced United to raise their game.

A year ago, when United arrived at the Bridge, Mourinho’s men had to form a begrudging guard of honour and applaud them on to the pitch.

On Saturday we shall learn whether Chelsea’s league challenge is clapped out again.

