SVEN-GORAN Eriksson’s reign as Manchester City manager began at West Ham and the hack pack congregated to ridicule him. 

The notion the players he had assembled from around the globe in just five weeks could become a team appeared preposterous.

Yet City won 2-0. Afterwards, reporters (including this one) mobbed Sven in a corridor, shoved tape recorders in his face and battered him with questions about his return to England.

He dealt with our inquiries politely, articulately and blandly.

Sven’s subdued style with the media mirrors the manner in which he manages football teams.

When he first arrived in England in 2001, his restrained demeanour charmed us. We took his silence as a sign of an inscrutable intelligence. Eventually, however, his apparent lack of passion infuriated the nation and we began to believe that he didn’t say much because he did not have much to say.

I remember the previous time I was in his presence, after the quarter-final defeat by Portugal in the 2006 World Cup.

Then, the eyes behind those owlish glasses looked hurt as he used his last media conference as England coach to urge us not to blame the red-carded Wayne Rooney for the national team’s World Cup elimination. Nobody did blame Rooney. We blamed Eriksson.

Now, as we contemplate a European championship without England, let us be as dispassionate as he appears and assess his England record fairly.

It is true that Eriksson did not seem able to influence events during matches, but his biggest “crimes” were that he was overpaid, over-sexed and over here. His salary, his eventful love-life and his nationality counted against him.
  

But his England won their qualifying group for three major tournaments and then reached the quarter-finals of all those tournaments.

One tournament defeat was against Brazil, the eventual World Cup winners. The other two were on penalties.

Come on. That looks like a golden era now, doesn’t it? Twenty months later, Sven is undermined again by unrealistic expectations. Just one man is demanding far more than is at all reasonable.

Thaksin Shinawatra, Manchester City’s owner, thinks that ninth place in the Premier League is failure – which proves he knows nothing about football.

So Sven will have to pack all his suits again and move on. This time he has our universal sympathy.

And, as we all agree that he has done a very good job with City, it should help us acknowledge that he had a very decent stab at the England job as well.

