IF you want to gauge the health of English football, tear your attention away from the scramble for the title and the Champions League please.

Let me tell you about a match at Chelsea tomorrow night, because it demonstrates symptoms of a 
systemic sickness.

The Blues play Manchester City in the first leg of the final of the FA Youth Cup, a tournament which has given us our first glimpses of some special talents over the years.

Duncan Edwards and the Busby Babes took part in the very first tournament in 1953 when they really were not much more than babies. And 39 years later David Beckham, Gary Neville, Nicky Butt and Paul Scholes were in another splendidly precocious Manchester United side who reached the final. In 1996, a cherubic Michael Owen stepped into the spotlight of national attention for the first time, alongside Jamie Carragher in a Liverpool team facing West Ham’s Frank Lampard and Rio Ferdinand.

In 2002 Wayne Rooney was in the Everton squad for the final, though nobody called him cherubic even then.

So, if you go to Stamford Bridge for this year’s final, which stars of tomorrow will you see? 
Well, there are two highly-rated Dutch kids. Jeffrey Bruma plays in midfield, while Patrick van Aanholt is a centre-back. 

Then there is Miroslav Stoch, a Slovakian winger, Gael Katuta, a French midfielder, Spaniard Sergio Tejera Rodriguez,  who operates just behind the forwards, and Morten Nielsen, a Danish striker. You get the picture. 

Of the Chelsea team which started their semi-final’s second leg against Aston Villa, six were kids from the Continent. And two of the other five have interesting CVs. Jacob Mellis is a Nottinghamshire lad. At the age of 12 he joined Sheffield United. Four years later, Chelsea paid £1.3million to take him to London. 
   

Blades’ chairman Terry Robinson recalls: “It was disappointing to lose such a talent. We made a great effort to keep hold of Jacob, but he made it clear he wanted to leave.”

Michael Woods is one of two lads who joined Chelsea from Leeds shortly after the Leeds coach moved to the London club, and Leeds accused the Blues of tapping-up the boys.

Chelsea made an undisclosed payment to Leeds and so there was no FA hearing.

That leaves us with three players. Goalkeeper Rhys Taylor is from Neath, and is playing for the reserves regularly now that Belgian Yves Makabu-Makalambay has moved to Hibs in Scotland.

Finally, we find two Londoners. Ofori-Twumasi Nana Seth was born in Ghana, but grew up in the 
capital. And Lee Sawyer, from Leytonstone, has been on the club’s books since he was nine.

That’s your lot. Two genuinely home-grown players out of 11. But this is not an anti-Chelsea rant (for a change). 
The idea of stocking an academy with imports was patented by Arsenal and is now being followed with much enthusiasm by Liverpool. 

Now, instead of developing local talent, our rich clubs cherry-pick the best from all over the world and are encouraged to do so by a European law. It says youngsters cannot turn pro before their 16th birthday, which seems fair enough. 

But what it means in practice is that clubs have no hold over young boys while they are 
nurturing their talents. Then our rich clubs entice away the best players at 16.

That is the age at which Cesc Fabregas arrived at Arsenal. He was a prolific scorer for Barcelona’s  youth teams but at 16 decided, for some reason that is not too difficult to work out,  that he preferred north London.

I'm glad Fabregas is playing in our league. Watching him can lift the soul. But I’d also like to see a decent England team. I doubt now that I ever will.



