The big number is 115,000,000. That is the amount of pounds one apparent expert says tonight’s Champions League final will be worth to the winning club.

It is so big that it is almost incomprehensible; £115million. But Professor Simon Chadwick, of Coventry University, has done the sums.

He has included the £30m or so Manchester United and Chelsea are each guaranteed for reaching the final, and 
factored in the additional sponsorship fees and opportunities the winners can expect. 

He has made a lot of assumptions and performed his calculations on behalf of Mastercard, who sponsor the 
competition, but it is clear that it is an extraordinarily rich life in the Champions League.

Now let’s think about the smaller number – four. That is how many millions of pounds Gretna FC owe various creditors, and it is likely to be sufficient to kill the Scottish club. All the staff were made redundant this week. 

As always happens, a group of businessmen is scratching around trying to piece together a salvage operation, but Gretna have deep, systemic problems, relating to another smallish number: 2,705.

That is the town’s population, and so the local club bobbed about in non-league football for decades, happy if crowds topped 400.

Then Brooks Mileson pitched up and began donating money. Gretna were elected to the Scottish Football League and Mileson, an English entrepreneur, bought decent players and paid them top wages. From 2005 to 2007 Gretna 
   
won the Division Three, Two and One titles in successive seasons. 

A giddy climb, embellished by appearing in a Scottish Cup final two years ago.

This season, just six years after playing in England’s Northern Premier League, Gretna arrived in the Scottish Premier. 

But Mileson announced there would be no new, major funding. Then, after a period in hospital, he stopped backing the club completely.

Nobody is sure why he pulled the plug. He has been ill, but he has also been evasive. 

But without Mileson’s millions, all that is left at Gretna is a husk of a football club.

So there you have two stories that are snapshots of the state of our game.

Fans dream of an Abramovich or an Ecclestone. But what if the investor is a Hicks or a Shinawatra? Or worse, a Mileson?

Gretna provide a scary parable for our game, because without the money with which wealthy men are indulging 
their hobbies, so many of the numbers just don’t add up.

