DOESN’T our four-club assault on Europe make you proud to be English? No, me neither. There’s not much Englishness involved, is there?

Last night it was Liverpool, owned by Americans (for now) and managed by a Spaniard (for a few more days) and Chelsea, Russian-owned and managed by an Israeli.

Tonight it is the turn of Arsenal (second-biggest shareholder Uzbekistani, fourth-biggest American, manager French) and Manchester United (American owners, Scottish manager).

Now count the English players involved tonight. United will have some, but Arsenal might not field a ­single one. Add those to the number of native players who ­represented Liverpool and Chelsea last night and the total will probably be about 12. England coach Fabio Capello must be tearing out his suspiciously dark hair.

Capello, in case you haven’t noticed, is Italian. So are the mates he brought over to help him run our national team.
Their names are a bit of a giveaway: Massimo Neri, Franco Tancredi, Franco Baldini and Italo Galbiati. Stuart Pearce is part of Team England as well, but he is a token Brit and must feel like a spud in a plate of pasta. 

Now let me tell you about the England C team, who are playing tonight. We used to have an England amateur team, which evolved into the England semi-professional team. Next it became known as the National Game XI, because the bit of the FA which dealt with football at that level was the National Game Board.

Eventually someone decided that the National Game XI was a daft title but instead opted for the C Team, which is even dafter. It sounds like the stand-ins for the understudies for Hannibal Smith, Murdock, Mr T  and the rest.

Anyway, the C team are pretty good. Last season they triumphed in the equivalent of the Home Internationals. Tonight they play Wales at Exeter, and are likely to give them a hiding.

They are  successful because the ­standard of play in non-league football is very high. That is because the sort of lads who used to find their way into Football League clubs are now playing non-league. That, in turn, is because the Football League clubs, like the Premier League clubs, fill their sides with imports.

This is no xenophobic rant. Foreign owners are no worse than the home-grown clots we have had in our boardrooms. It is hard to argue against ­foreign coaches when you think of the miracles wrought by Arsene Wenger and it is no bad thing to see Cristiano Ronaldo and Emmanuel Adebayor ­performing over here.

But unless we accept our only ­international future is as a C team, we must strive to get more English players in the Premier League and Champions League. Why not by a real investment in coaching our kids? After fighting the ‘39th step’, that should be our first step to putting the English back in English football.

