GUUS HIDDINK and Ray Wilkins sat cross-armed and stern-faced for most of Chelsea’s exposure of Aston Villa’s failings.

They looked like Statler and Waldorf, the old curmudgeons from the Muppet Show.

Chelsea’s temporary manager has a seriousness about him and his assistant Wilkins has noted the tone.

Hiddink left his seat for occasional strolls in the technical area, but even his understated reaction to the winning goal was brief. He sat down quickly, his lugubrious face resuming its contemplative expression.

He is very different to the last bloke. And perhaps Chelsea have made a statement that Luiz Felipe Scolari’s easy-going affability was not right for the club.

That appeared to be the key message delivered by the players. Whenever anyone did anything well, a team-mate made a point of doing that trendy fist-touching thing as soon as there was a break in the action.

GET ALL THE LATEST FROM CHELSEA FC NOW!

At the end, players pointedly performed group hugs in front of their fans. It was a laboured, over-theatrical PR initiative to say: “We’re all devoted to the cause. There are no rifts.” The implication was that it is much better now than under Scolari.

But some who now deride Scolari sang very different tunes when Chelsea kicked off the season with 27 goals in 11 unbeaten matches.

That should put us on our guard against hailing Hiddink as a genius on the strength of one narrow victory. As Villa manager Martin O’Neill said: “Sometimes people can read an incredible amount into a game just because of the eventual result”.

 


O’Neill was right about the specifics of this match, because if Ashley Young’s first-half free-kick had struck the bar a smidgeon lower the ball would have gone in. Then we would all be talking about Villa’s resilience and their unbeaten run. He is correct as well about the general tendency to make snap judgments too glibly in football.

But you can glean some facts from sifting the evidence presented at one match. And we learnt more about Villa than we did about Chelsea.

As with O’Neill’s teams at Wycombe, Leicester and Celtic, Villa have some huge athletes and a simple philosophy of getting the ball forward often and quickly.

When Gabriel Agbonlahor and Young are at their explosive best, that approach is good enough, but it has its limitations as does Agbonlahor.

When his pace carried him clear for a one-on-one with goalkeeper Petr Cech nobody in the ground was confident he would score, least of all him. He did not. And the contrast with Nicolas Anelka’s deft, confident finish for the game’s only goal was marked.

In the two games played since Scolari was paid off, Anelka has thrived alongside Didier Drogba and we are invited to believe their sudden, joyous bonhomie is an indictment of the previous manager. But Drogba’s rebirth is really a condemnation of his own inexcusable lethargy since the final months of Avram Grant’s reign.

When Drogba wants to play, he is a force of nature, a challenge for the best defences and a reminder that Chelsea have some wonderful talents at their disposal.

The first three Chelsea men to emerge for the second half, strutting with an imperious self-belief and a resolute sense of purpose, were John Terry, Frank Lampard and Michael Ballack.

At the end, after that over-cooked show of togetherness in front of the travelling supporters, the same trio were last to leave the field.

Terry and Ballack had thrown their shirts to the crowd and the three strode off like triumphant gladiators. Ballack plays as if holding himself back a little, but with Lampard he provides a potent kernel in midfield. Terry is still one of the world’s great defenders.

If you add Cech, who looked much less tentative than of late, you realise Chelsea’s ‘spine’ the line of players running up the middle – is as good as money can buy. Not muppets after all.

