He was sitting on one of his yachts watching as Chelsea drew with Hull on TV.

Then Roman Abramovich decided enough was enough.

He flew to England, talked to Didier Drogba, Michael Ballack and a few other dissidents, sacked Luiz Felipe Scolari and then got his people to ring Guus Hiddink.

And there, in a couple of sentences, is everything that is wrong with Russian Abramovich’s style, or lack of it.

Seemingly, he could not be bothered to go to the game. Did he arrogantly assume that Hull should be swatted aside? He made a knee-jerk decision and then handed the job to a mate. Worst of all, he thought Drogba and the other rebels without a clue had the answers instead of realising they were the problem.

I made up my mind about Drogba in last season’s Champions League semi-final at Anfield. He was a disgrace. Seldom has a player looked less interested with so much at stake. Then, in the final, Drogba slapped Manchester United’s Nemanja Vidic three minutes before the end of extra-time; an act of almost criminal negligence. John Terry replaced him in the penalty shoot-out, missed and cost Chelsea the trophy Abramovich craves.

Denied a reunion with Jose Mourinho at Inter Milan, Drogba threw a six-month strop. Only after Scolari had collected his pay-off did Drogba rouse himself. At Watford in the FA Cup he was involved in two of the moves which brought goals for Nicolas Anelka, celebrated with what looked like genuine enthusiasm and even produced a trademark dive.

If Drogba had showed a soupcon of that devotion earlier this season,they might be closer to the top and Abramovich might have had less excuse for believing the lunatic view that there was a crisis.

As for Hiddink, well, Abramovich has twice foisted his friends on Chelsea. First he bought Andriy Shevchenko because their wives were pals. But he got rid of his wife and then conceded the striker was not exciting enough either.

     

Abramovich made another chum, Avram Grant, manager briefly, only to decide that finishing second in the league and in Europe was failure.

Hiddink knows much more about football than his paymaster. That is fortunate for everyone at Chelsea except Drogba, Ballack and anyone else who seem to put narrow self-interest ahead of the club who pay them so well.

