A change of manager and an altered playing style, but a starker financial future. These are interesting days.

You thought I was talking about Chelsea?

First, let me tell you about Championship Watford, who put the so-called crisis at Stamford Bridge into perspective.

They expect their income next season to be less than £12million – a lot of money in the real world but a
pittance in football and loose change to Chelsea. 

Roman Abramovich spent more on a painting last year and twice that sum on paying off sacked managers. And at least we all know who calls the shots at Chelsea.

GET ALL THE LATEST PREMIERSHIP NEWS FROM YOUR CLUB NOW

Graham Simpson resigned as Watford chairman in December before an emergency board meeting called by directors, who wanted him to explain financial dealings. 

So Watford are led by Jimmy and Vince Russo, who run the salad growing and importing firm founded by their Sicilian father.

They own less than 30 per cent of the club, but pulled off a coup last month by persuading much-loved former manager Graham Taylor to return as a non-executive director. 

Taylor, in turn, coaxed Elton John to resume his links with the club even if Elton will not be putting in any money.

      

The brothers have loaned £1.8m but this must all be paid back, with nearly £70,000 interest, by the summer.

Manager Brendan Rodgers, charged with changing the sterile football of Aidy Boothroyd, made only loan deals and one free signing in January.

Such boardroom intrigue and a hand-to-mouth existence is replicated throughout the Championship. So, please, can we stop talking about a crisis at Chelsea? They have lost twice in 15 matches. 

There are 16 teams below them in the Premier League. They are still in the Champions League and are now in the quarter-finals of the FA Cup.

Guus Hiddink, who starts work as temporary manager today, saw his new charges cope with Watford. So what did he learn?

First: wear something more substantial than a raincoat in England in February.

His dead-pan expression might have been because it was set solid with the cold.

Second: do not sit next to Abramovich. He is very excitable at matches.

Third: do not have chief executive Peter Kenyon next to you on the other side. Keep him in front of you where you can see him.

Fourth: Frank Lampard is an extraordinary talent – honest and with exceptional technique.

Fifth: There are some decent kids in the squad. Young Michael Mancienne can play a bit, while Salomon Kalou is more productive than is appreciated.

And, finally: Ray Wilkins is more than just a decent bloke.

There is a feeling that articulate and carefully understated Wilkins was hired as assistant manager to be the bland face of Chelsea while Luiz Felipe Scolari struggled with the language and the complexities of managing.

But Wilkins has had an outstanding few days, which went unnoticed and unappreciated. 

Left to hold the reins when Scolari was sacked, he focused straight away on the Watford game.

Wilkins played Mancienne because he was impressive in training. He held talks with Nicolas Anelka, whom he persuaded to play wide on the right, and with Didier Drogba, whom he persuaded to stop sulking and start running about a bit.

He refused to bad-mouth Scolari and talked up Chelsea’s prospects.

Then, he flew to watch European opponents Juventus play Sampdoria.

As Watford have demonstrated by bringing back Taylor, you need good football people to build a good football club.

