An unseemly scramble to rush through the £15million signing of Andrei Arshavin a full day after the transfer window was supposed to have closed could not have come at a worse moment for Arsenal.

While other members of the club’s staff were frantically trying to ensure the signing was ratified yesterday evening, the new man in charge at the Emirates Stadium was painting a picture of how the club was a beacon of proper behaviour within a lawless Premier League.

Ivan Gazidis, freshly installed as chief executive, was speaking to selected members of the media to outline his philosophy and vision.

He said English football is as lawless as the Wild West. And he should know, as he has just spent 14 years working in America.

GET ALL THE LATEST PREMIERSHIP NEWS FROM YOUR CLUB NOW




 
But, Gazidis insisted, the Gunners would continue to behave with rectitude.

He was very bullish, and stressed that if Arsenal do not qualify for next season’s Champions League it will not be a financial disaster and will not derail their policy of living within their means rather than seeking foreign investment.

He was supportive, too, of manager Arsene Wenger’s reluctance to spend huge sums on experienced stars.

But then Gazidis had to hurry away to talk to – guess who? – an expensive, experienced player who was hoping to become a Gunner.

 
     

Arshavin was sitting in an office at Arsenal as the drama surrounding his move took up a second day.

There were several elements that added to the delay.

One was that both the Premier League and the Football Association were short-staffed on Monday because snow had crippled London’s transport network.

Another factor was that Zenit St Petersburg, the selling club, were tardy with their paperwork.

But why was it all left so late? Gazidis fended off the first criticism of his new role by saying: “It is the nature of deadlines in general that people will wait till the last minute. Sometimes you just have to let the clock run down.”

Gazidis, 43, was born in South Africa, raised in England and made his name working in the United States for Major League Soccer. He played a major part in the deal taking David Beckham from Real Madrid to LA Galaxy.

At Arsenal he replaced Keith Edelman, who oversaw the building of the £500m Emirates Stadium, on time and on budget, but was then sacked.

Other disruptions at Arsenal have included the enforced departure of vice-chairman David Dein and of Lady Nina Bracewell-Smith, a shareholder and director.

American Stan Kroenke and Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov both own large chunks of the club and, unusually, directors control fewer shares than the various parties outside the board. There are football problems as well.

Arsenal are fifth in the table, and so are in danger of not qualifying for the Champions League for a first time in 12 seasons.

Gazidis said: “Within the context of our overall position, revenue from the Champions League is not critical.

“We are generating more than £90m a year from the Emirates Stadium just from tickets sales.

“There is a lot more to a sustainable business model than just Champions League income.”

Remaining sustainable is a crucial tenet for Gazidis and part of the reason he got the job.

It fits with the views of Danny Fiszman, the Geneva-based diamond dealer currently making the key decisions at the club. But it is not the view of Dein, who has now aligned himself with Usmanov.

Gazidis said: “There is an inherent instability where a club is dependent on any outside source of income for its continued success or, in some cases, survival.

“You are placing yourself where you are dependent on what may happen in a market-place or in a business that has nothing to do with football.

“I know Stan well. He is not the sort of person to be involved in a hostile takeover. I don’t know Usmanov but I plan to meet him to talk.”

But the important man, as far as Gazidis is concerned, is Wenger. “Arsene is under a contract but it goes far beyond the contractual background,” Gazidis said.

“Arsene is intrinsically entwined in this club and feels a sense of responsibility for it. He loves the club.

“He has redefined the club and taken us to a point where everyone is talking about fifth position as a crisis.

“We are not happy to be fifth; Arsene isn’t happy to be fifth. But we believe in the group of young players that he has. He is an intensely ambitious person who believes there is unfinished business.”

And with that, Gazidis left to finish the Andrei Arshavin business.

