Someone who sees a lot of the Prime Minister remarked to me the other day that he had not seen Gordon Brown so happy in years. The world is crashing around his ears and Mr Brown has to stop himself smiling too obviously. His chin is up. His stride has lengthened. His shoulders have straightened. He has even taken to cracking jokes, albeit of the gallows variety. When someone's mobile interrupted a speech, he chucklingly wondered 'if another bank has fallen'. Those who have spent time in conversation with him in recent days find the Prime Minister on remarkably relaxed form. He has become a fount of political aphorisms. 'An hour is a long time in politics,' he has been heard to quip, an updating of Harold Wilson's old saw, referring to both the dizzying speed of global events and the apparent reversal in his own fortunes. 

The opinion polls continue to tell a dismal story for Labour, the more sober ministers still expect to lose the next election, but Gordon Brown looks like a new man. The hunched, hunted Prime Minister of just a few weeks ago has been replaced by a confident, even swaggering figure. Which is the more amazing, of course, because what he is strutting through is mayhem in the banking system and meltdown on the stock market. I don't doubt that much of this is presentational. There was a frenzy of activity behind the scenes in the hours before he coolly announced the eye-watering £400bn rescue plan for the banks, taking the total commitment to £500bn. His face is still etched with exhaustion. But he looks contentedly knackered rather than miserably knackered. 

People at Number 10 hesitate to agree when I suggest to them that Gordon Brown is enjoying this crisis. How can they say the Prime Minister is getting a kick from events which are going to inflict great pain in the lives of so many people? But those around him don't quarrel with the suggestion that he feels that he has finally found himself as Prime Minister. 

The truth is that the leaders often do relish crises. Margaret Thatcher once confessed that she never felt more energised as Prime Minister than she was during the Falklands War. Military conflict gave her an adrenaline shot much more potent than the humdrumities of normal political life. Tony Blair was always at his most animated when he could place himself at the centre of a high drama, whether it be the death of Diana or 9/11. Mr Brown now finds himself thrust into the role of a war leader - a war for economic survival - and it has galvanised him like no other event of his premiership. 

The bank rescue scheme was the work of many minds in the Treasury, the Bank of England, the Financial Services Authority and Number 10, but he gets to stamp his name on it and project himself as decisive. 'It has felt for the first time that government is actually governing,' says one Treasury official. The flaws in the plan will become apparent, but it has been widely hailed in Britain even by his political opponents and is being held up abroad as a template for other governments to copy. Labour MPs are cheering him again. They had something to celebrate for the first time in months when he casually squelched David Cameron at Prime Minister's Questions. 

In the early autumn, when his attempt at a relaunch sank without trace and Labour MPs began to go public with calls for him to be replaced, Mr Brown's closest allies began to fear that the cabinet would not need to unseat him because he would decide to quit of his own accord before it got to that. Now the plot to topple him has fizzled out. It may be revived if Labour is hammered in next spring's elections, but for the moment the rebels have sheathed their knives and the cabinet sceptics about his leadership are keeping quiet. As well as giving the Prime Minister a new sense of purpose, the crisis has also lifted the morale of his party. Though Labour's electoral successes owed quite a lot to the debt-fuelled boom years, the party is in an emotionally happier place when financiers are going bust and it can talk about skinning fat cats, taking over banks and regulating markets.

Conversely, this huge market failure poses acute intellectual and political questions for the Tories, the instinctive champions of minimal regulation. They are palpably divided about whether to be the defenders of capitalism or to join in the cry to lynch the bankers. 'It is difficult for us. No question,' says one senior Conservative. There was an agonised discussion about Tory strategy when the shadow cabinet met last week. They concluded that they would have to remain supportive of the government for the moment for fear of being seen as opportunistic and unstatesmanlike at a time of national emergency. 

The problem for David Cameron and George Osborne is that this casts them as Little Sir Echoes, reduced to supporting the government from the sidelines. Where Gordon Brown has struggled with many of the other demands of being a modern leader, this crisis plays to his strengths. Stock markets are plunging and banks are toppling, but he is in his comfort zone. He operates confidently in this arena, not least because he has developed relationships with all the key players around the globe. In quick succession on Friday afternoon, he held conversations with Angela Merkel of Germany, Nicolas Sarkozy of France and José Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, as part of the effort to cajole other governments to take co-ordinated global action before the Western world's financial system implodes. Those talks were conducted on a mobile phone while he was on a train to Swindon. Such are the surrealities of being Prime Minister at this time. One moment, he is trying to persuade the President of France to copy his bank rescue; the next, he is attempting to explain the plan to a pensioners' group in a marginal seat. 

His evident hope is that this crisis will win him a second chance with all those voters who had lost respect for him as a leader. This is his opportunity to reverse Vince Cable's deadly crack, to transform himself from Mr Bean back into the Iron Leader again. In early September, I had a conversation with one of Mr Brown's closest allies in the cabinet. This minister did not argue with me when I put it to him that the voters were so settled in their animosity towards Gordon Brown that they 'hit the mute button' whenever he tried to speak to them. 'The crisis is a chance to be heard. People are now willing to listen to him again,' says one of the Prime Minister's senior aides.

That does not mean they will be willing to vote for him in 20 months' time. There is a huge dislocation between how things are viewed by those inside the political beltway and how they look to the public. Politicians, commentators and economic sages may be impressed by the intelligence and boldness with which Mr Brown has moved to try to save the stricken banks. Voters are furious that so much taxpayers' money is being committed to rescue financiers from their own folly and they are delivering that message to Labour MPs This is why Mr Brown is cranking up the rhetoric by saying reckless bankers will be 'punished' in ways as yet unspecified. To try to assuage the voters over the coming days, you will hear him and his ministers arguing that they are not committing these vast sums because they love bankers, but because the alternative is the ruination of the whole economy.

The Prime Minister is nervous of voter rage and he is right to be so. The public are entitled to be incandescent with the discredited titans of finance, not one of whom has yet offered a single word of public remorse or apology for what they have done.

That public mood is likely to get much blacker as the economy turns down. The plunge in global stock markets over the past few days has been caused by panicked investors pricing stocks for a very nasty recession. Even on the more optimistic forecasts, a lot of voters are going t o be nursing losses - of their jobs, of their homes, of their pensions. At the same time, ballooning government debt points to a severe squeeze on services. Whitehall is already anticipating the bloodiest spending negotiations for a generation. Mr Brown has guaranteed spending only on health and education, which implies serious pain everywhere else.

Politically difficult in any circumstances, the boggling billions directed to the banks makes this even harder to sell to the voters. Every time a cut falls, the cry will go up: you could find £500bn for the banks, but you can't find £10m for my cherished public service. 

Even if voters do credit him with firefighting the financial inferno, they may also regard Gordon Brown as one of the people responsible for lighting the blaze. There's an interesting debate to be had about when the Age of Irresponsibility began. Was it in 1997 (the Tory version) when Gordon Brown moved into the Treasury and redesigned the regulatory structure? Was it in 1986 (the left's version) when Cecil Parkinson's bonfire of controls unleashed the 'Big Bang'? Does culpability lie with both? Voters are likely to leave that argument to academics and blame the man who has been running the economy for more than a decade. 

That reckoning lies in the future. For now, Gordon Brown has won more time, recovered some respect and invested his premiership with a greater sense of purpose. I can say what his aides dare not. He is enjoying this crisis. In fact, he has probably never felt more alive as Prime Minister. That is quite a transformation for a man who, just a few weeks ago, was being taken for dead.
