When the legislation taking over the Northern Wreck passed into law late on Thursday night, a handful of Labour backbenchers amused themselves by striking up a chorus of 'The Red Flag'. These old comrades were hushed by the chair before they could explain which of the players in this saga represents 'our martyr'd dead'. Gordon Brown's great fear was that his limbs would be rendered 'stiff and cold' by the Wreck and his blood 'dyed in its every fold'. So neurotic was he about the n-word that he had feverishly searched for any other route than the one he was finally obliged to take. He had nibbled his nails with worry that this would be seen as Red Monday, the moment when Labour lurched back to the bad old days when it wanted to nationalise the solar system. 

David Cameron and George Osborne did indeed try this angle of attack when the Tory leader called it 'a nationalisation of which Castro would be proud' and the shadow Chancellor declared that they would 'not help Gordon Brown take this country back to the 1970s'. There was a basic problem with this line of fire from the Tories. It simply didn't ring true. The Conservatives made themselves, not the government, sound ridiculous. It was not even a quarter plausible, not when everyone knew how frantically Gordon Brown had sought a private sector buyer. 

Treasury officials had been told to bend over backwards to strike a deal. The government did everything it could to avoid this outcome, including putting forward a proposal a few weeks ago that was widely and correctly criticised for being too generous to private buyers. No one thinks that this is a precursor to the government renationalising British Airways, British Telecom, the utilities and what's left of the British motor industry.

The 'Red Flag' singers were being ironic. As one of their number, Ken Purchase, said to me later: 'Anything less socialist than the nationalisation of Northern Rock is hard to imagine.' It was not done in the name of the workers, many of whom are likely to lose their jobs as the bank is shrunk. It was done to save the bank and the wider financial system from the fecklessness of the directors who got them into this mess. Far from celebrating their acquisition of the bust mortgage lender, ministers have been anxious to emphasise how quickly they want the bank returned to the private sector. This was not an act of ideological conviction in public ownership. It was an act of last resort when there was no private rescue available that offered a half-decent deal for the taxpayer. In so much as the Tories were clear about what they would have done, putting the Wreck in administration under the supervision of the Bank of England would be another form of state control. It was never going to fly, the claim that Labour had suddenly rediscovered the joys of nationalisation.

The other Tory attack was to depict this as the result of such epic incompetence by the government that it could never be trusted again with the economy, Labour's equivalent of John Major's humiliation on Black Wednesday when sterling crashed out of the European exchange rate mechanism. You can see why the Conservatives ached for this to be the case. Gordon Brown has been serially wounded over the past few months, but none of the many blows has been fatal. The Tories are ahead in the polls, but they do not enjoy anything like the advantage they need to be confident of victory at the next election. They yearn for a catastrophe so great that it drives a stake through Gordon Brown's heart. Their desperation for this to be supplied by Northern Rock was a bit too naked. 'A disaster for the country,' shouted Mr Osborne. 'A calamity,' cried Mr Cameron, straining to show that he can be even more hyperbolic than his shadow Chancellor. They revelled so obviously in the government's embarrassment that they made an issue of their own judgment. 

Mr Cameron demanded the resignation of the Chancellor while Mr Osborne shrilled that Alistair Darling was now 'a dead man walking'. Yet both the Chancellor and the Prime Minister are still breathing this weekend. So crushed was he by Black Wednesday that John Major wrote a letter resigning as Prime Minister. (The letter was found by one of his officials, Stephen Wall, who tore it up). Something tells me that Mr Brown is not composing a suicide note. 

This event has been nothing like as seismic as he feared and the Tories hoped. The very length of the saga drained away some of the drama. It is six months since the Crock had to go to the Bank of England for help and the government began to agonise over what to do. This has allowed the Conservatives to get up the charge of dithering against the Prime Minister, but it also meant he can contend plausibly that he explored every reasonable option to public ownership before the government took that step. When it eventually happened, the once unthinkable had become the predictably inevitable. The only politician to have come out of this with a handsome reputational dividend is Vince Cable because the Lib Dem called it right by saying many weeks ago that public ownership would be the least bad option. 

This has not had the same psychological impact on the country as Black Wednesday. On that day in the autumn of 1992, the central plank of the government's economic policy was blown asunder. When interest rates hit dizzy levels, millions of people were petrified that they were about to lose their homes. Though most didn't, they couldn't forgive a government that had put them through such trauma. On the morning after, the Sun's headline was: 'Now we've ALL been screwed by the cabinet.' On the morning after the government announced it was taking over Northern Rock, the Sun splashed with a story about the Diana inquest.

The polling taken in the wake of the takeover suggests that the public takes an unhysterical view. Few voters blame the government for the bank's problems and only a minority think that the Tories would have handled it any better. Yes, the Rock shareholders are absolutely furious. But these are not people with whom the public should or will have much sympathy. The shareholders should be angry with themselves for failing to monitor what their reckless directors were up to. Even less deserving of our tears are the hedge funds that speculated in the bank after everyone knew it was in trouble. They gambled that they could turn a profit by holding the rescue process to ransom. The government has called their bluff. The taxpayer should no more compensate these speculators than the taxpayer should pay the losses of someone who loses at internet poker. 

There's a better argument to be made against the government about the inadequacies of the regulatory regime created by Gordon Brown. The Financial Services Authority, the Bank of England and the Treasury failed to spot trouble coming and then bungled the response when disaster struck. The difficulty for the Tories is that they are not best placed to make the case for more stringent control of banks having previously advocated even lighter regulation. If there is a moral to a story about under-supervised directors ruining a bank and jeopardising the banking system, the moral is not a right-wing one.

The cost to the reserves of Black Wednesday was £3.3bn, about £4.8bn in today's money. The taxpayers' exposure to Northern Rock is many mind-boggling magnitudes higher. But there is a difference between theoretical risk and actual cost. The taxpayer would lose all £100bn only if every one of Northern Rock's mortgages became worthless. When I made inquiries about how much it has cost the taxpayer so far, a Treasury official told me: 'The figures haven't been added up yet.' And they won't be, I bet, for a while. We will probably not discover the true cost for many years. Mr Brown even talks gamely about it being 'quite possible' that the bank will be returned to the private sector at a profit. 

We'll see about that. The Prime Minister may not have been dashed on the Rock, but Gordon Brown is still chained to it. He can talk about a period of 'temporary public ownership', but the new man in charge, Ron Sadler, has already said that it could be years before the bank is fit to survive on its own. It doesn't sound like he thinks the government will get it off their hands before the next election, even if that election is as late as May 2010. 

The stress they put on the bank being run 'at arm's length' from government underlines the nervousness among ministers that they will now cop the blame for job losses in Labour's north-eastern heartland and for home repossessions. The pain inflicted on those suffering the consequences of sorting out this bank will be contrasted with the fat fees paid out to advisers and the £90,000 a month being earned by the bank's new boss who is, awkwardly, a non-dom. 

The self-pitying shareholders can ensnare the government in the courts for months of legal argy-bargy. On top of that, the arrangement has yet to be approved by the competition commissioners of the European Union. The amount of money and effort put in to save the bank will be invoked whenever the government is refusing to satisfy other demands. You could call this Millennium Dome syndrome. It became one of the best lines of attack on Tony Blair to say that he could have bought 10 hospitals or 50 schools for the cost of the damned dome. Whenever a post office is closed, the cry will go up: you saved a bust bank, so why not my local post office? 

This was not a Black Wednesday. Even less was it a Red Monday. A better name is Grey Thursday.
