The Peter Hain Fan Club (founding member: Hain, Peter) has never been terribly large. When he tested his popularity within his own party, he came fifth out of six in the contest to become Labour's deputy leader, despite the embarrassingly large sums that were poured into his campaign. In so much as colleagues are behind him at his time of trial, some are only at his shoulder the better to put the knife in. Gordon Brown has defended him more because he does not want to lose his first cabinet minister than because of any love for his embattled Secretary of State.
So it may put me in a small minority when I say that I have always been rather glad that Peter Hain left South Africa and became part of the British political scene. That's partly because he has an engaging tendency to speak his mind, a refreshing attribute in an age of the robotic. He has a hinterland that is rather more characterful than the blander members of the political class. As a schoolboy in South Africa, he had his bedroom searched by the apartheid state's police. They thought they may find something subversive hidden in his collection of pictures of racing cars. As an anti-apartheid campaigner in Britain, he was subjected to a conspiracy trial for leading the protests to stop sporting tours by apartheid teams. His campaigning so needled the regime that Boss, the South African spooks, tried to frame him for a bank robbery. He's had a letter bomb through his door.

When he is putting a brave face on it, Mr Hain tells friends that, having lived through a letter bomb and a fit-up, he can cope with a furore about hidden donations to his failed deputy leadership campaign. My guess is, though, that this episode is much more traumatising to his soul. When he was campaigning against apartheid, he was a heroic figure, contending with forces of darkness on behalf of truth, justice and democracy. The funding imbroglio leaves him looking, at best, like a fool. He's now had to reveal, seven months after the deadline, that he failed to properly declare 17 donations totalling £103,000. The murk has been deepened by the role as a conduit for some of the cash of the Progressive Policies Forum, a think-tank that has no record of doing any thinking.

This does not make Peter Hain a criminal. There is no evidence that any of these donations was illegal. It is true also that it was not the media or the opposition, but Mr Hain himself who was the first to disclose that his campaign had broken the rules. It is the sheer size of the donations that is part of his problem. To overlook £5,000 might be an oversight; to fail to declare more than £100,000 is gob-smacking. Gordon Brown was putting it mildly when he called it 'an incompetence'. Mr Hain had previously been regarded as one of the more capable members of the cabinet, but this label has now been hung around his neck. To be branded incompetent is, to say the least, unfortunate for a minister in charge of a budget in excess of £100bn.

There is one positive conclusion that we can draw from this latest donations uproar to engulf a cabinet minister. Money can't buy you love in politics. Despite all the glossy leaflets and newspaper adverts that were bought to promote Mr Hain, he came a distant also-ran in the contest for the deputy leadership. All that money only bought him fifth place and a whole heap of grief.

That is so often the way. The million that Tony Blair took from Bernie Ecclestone was small change compared to the blow to his reputation by the first affair that warned us that Labour was not going to keep his promise to be 'purer than pure'. The cash that Harriet Harman got from David Abrahams, man of multiple identities, was never worth the horrible embarrassment to her and the collateral damage that it inflicted on Gordon Brown and his claim to be guided by a 'moral compass'. Wendy Alexander, Labour's leader in Scotland, found herself in the mire for a pathetic 950 quid.

Which leads to another, more discouraging conclusion: the political classes even now don't get it. After all the sleaze eruptions of the Major and the Blair years, you would have thought that any politician with a care for his or her reputation would be careful to the point of paranoia about funding. If only for reasons of self-preservation, they ought to have the rules lasered on to their eyeballs and those of everyone who works for them.

Peter Hain sat in Tony Blair's cabinet as the previous Prime Minister's reputation was trashed by funding scandals. When I interviewed him for my Channel 4 series on the Blair years, Mr Hain was typically candid and direct about the severe damage done to the government by the various sleaze episodes that punctuated that decade. But had he himself learnt the lesson? Apparently not. Someone with a legal duty to report donations cannot just plead that he was too busy and his team too disorganised to make sure he stuck to the rules.

There was some surprise - and, for Mr Hain, relief - that David Cameron did not go for him at Prime Minister's Questions. The Conservative leader anticipated, and correctly, that Gordon Brown would have thrown back at him examples of Tory transgressions. Mr Cameron's constituency association was recently found to have taken two illegal donations. Labour MPs have not forgotten about Michael Ashcroft, the Tory sugar daddy, pouring large sums into marginal seats. The Conservatives still cannot give a straight answer about the tax and residency status of their big money man. They have their own problems about the proper declaration of some of their donations. None of the parties has a freehold on the moral high ground.

The Cabinet Secretary has helpfully cleared Mr Hain of breaking the ministerial code of conduct. His fate is now in the hands of the Electoral Commission and the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards, John Lyon. If the Work and Pensions Secretary is mildly reprimanded, cabinet colleagues see him surviving. If he is severely censured or worse, they don't see how he can avoid the drop.

The much larger thing at stake is the reputation of the political class as a whole. Trust in all politicians, and faith in democracy itself, is being corroded by the drip-drip of funding scandals. The cash for honours affairs impelled Tony Blair to ask Sir Hayden Phillips, a former Permanent Secretary, to try to find cross-party agreement on reforms. Sir Hayden came up with a generally sensible package of new limits on both spending and the size of donations. The figure of £50,000 may sound big to many people on an average salary, but it would be a small proportion of the huge sums that the parties have been used to getting from their toxic dependency on millionaires.

Agreement has been stymied by the unwillingness of the parties to put aside their self-interest in the cause of rescuing the reputation of politics as a whole. Labour is desperate to protect its cash from the unions while the Tories are highly resistant to sacrificing the advantage they get from their Ashcroft money. Both of them should give ground. Labour should accept that it needs to be made easier for union members to opt out of paying the political levy or to give the money to other parties if they prefer. People should only be paying money to a political party if they want to. The Tories should accept tighter limits on what can be spent in individual constituencies. If it is wrong for a donor to be able to buy a seat in the Lords, it can't be right that cash could buy a seat in the Commons. Unless the parties can make an agreement both to reform the rules and to stick to them, they will be condemned to one uproar about funding after another.

Most of our politicians are not bent. They may be vainglorious, foolish and incompetent, but the vast majority are not crooks. Peter Hain is not a richer man for the money he received. In fact, he is poorer in both reputation and wallet. His campaign has left him with debts of more than £40,000 which, unless he can find another generous benefactor from somewhere, he will have to pay from his own pocket. Harriet Harman had to resort to taking out a mortgage on her house to fund her campaign.

I take sleaze seriously, because only by exposing it and stamping on it whenever it occurs do we keep our politics clean. But the truth is that most British 'scandals' are pretty trivial compared with the multi-million pound corruption cases that are a regular feature of the politics of many other countries. It is no longer legal, as it was 10 years ago, to take secret money from foreign tycoons and never reveal where the loot had come from at all. Britain remains relatively clean compared with France, Italy or America, to name just three countries where Peter Hain would seem laughably small beer.

It is the recklessly sloppy and slippery attitude towards the rules that is spreading the impression that British politics is more corrupt than it actually is. Most of the time, our politicians try to make themselves look better than they really are. When it comes to political funding, they are contriving to make themselves look worse than they really are. 
