July 8 2005 was a dark day for two Olympic sports – as baseball and softball were voted out of the Games from 2012. The International Baseball Federation would be forced to reapply in order to get back into the Games at the IOC assembly in Copenhagen in October 2009 - a huge blow for proponents of both sports in countries where they tend to fly under the radar. It was especially painful for the British Baseball Federation; two days earlier we had learnt that London, not Paris, would follow Beijing as an Olympic host city, meaning that GB would've had an automatic place in both baseball and softball for the first time, likely leading to increased funding and a spike in popularity. Instead the golden springboard was swiped from under their feet.

It's anything but routine for sports to be voted out of the Games; it hadn't happened in nearly 70 years, since polo was ousted from the Olympic programme. Baseball and softball's removal took place three years after IOC members had resisted president Jacques Rogge's proposal that those two sports, along with modern pentathlon, should be dropped and replaced with sports on the waiting list - rugby and golf. 

From a political point of view, it seemed that baseball was being punished for the way it drug tested athletes and punished offenders. From a competition point of view, there was frustration that Major League Baseball refused to pause its season and release its best players to represent their countries. There are no big leaguers on the current United States roster, while Japan features some players from Nippon Professional Baseball. Personally, I feel badly for the world's softball players, who have undoubtedly suffered from guilt by bat and ball association. Spare a thought for Cuba as well; winners of three of the last four tournaments, Cubanos treasure Olympic baseball like no other nation.

So Beijing's eight-team round-robin tournament could represent the swansong for Olympic baseball, a sport which has appeared 13 times since the Stockholm Games of 1912, becoming an official medal event in Barcelona 16 years ago. It has been said that the demise of both baseball and softball is partially due to anti-American feelings in the influential European IOC camp. Exhibit A involves modern pentathlon, a less popular pursuit, but one steeped in Olympic tradition and supposedly well supported by European IOC members – it survived the 2005 vote while the American sports did not. Those members from the continent, unaware that baseball has a substantial history in Europe, should brush up for the 2009 vote and pick up a copy of Baseball in Europe: A Country by Country History by Josh Chetwynd, who once played professionally in Sweden and currently co-hosts Five's live Major League Baseball coverage in the UK.

The volume, unrivaled in its description of baseball's presence on the other side of the Atlantic, could persuade European members that they voted wrong back in 2005. It offers colourful, comprehensive coverage of baseball history in countries such as Croatia, Britain, Russia/USSR, the Czech Republic, Belgium, the Netherlands and Italy, and also includes round-ups of every baseball European Championships ever held. It also has a handy international glossary of baseball terms, where I discovered how to say "shutout" in Italian: "Partita in cui gli avversari non segnano", and "umpire" in German: "Schiedsrichter".

The definitive guide to baseball in Europe excels in its storytelling, notably in the recapping of baseball's appearance at the infamous 1936 Berlin Olympics. Chetwynd explains that Adolf Hitler and his mistress Eva Braun, became somewhat infatuated with baseball, and that a young middle infielder named Dow Wilson spoke with the Führer regularly during the Games. Wilson, then oblivious to Hitler's policies and beliefs, recalled his brush with the dictator. "I was 19, what do 19-year-olds talk about," he said. "[Hitler] was polite and seemed like a nice man who obviously became a very bad man."

Wilson could never figure out why they were so fixated with ballplayers. Hitler was in attendance at Olympic Stadium for the split-squad game made up of Americans, sitting in his box which was worryingly in play near the right field line. Although players were warned by a Nazi official not to hit balls to the right, several shots headed in the dictator's direction during batting practice - unfortunately never hitting the Führer. Had the players been a bit more accurate, history may have been changed forever.

Seventy-two years later, baseball is on its way out of the Olympic scene. It makes little sense, especially as America's "national pastime" continues to enjoy unprecedented global popularity, with more countries than ever able to put out competitive teams. The IOC needs to put aside any lingering ill will and restore baseball and softball in time for 2016.
