Los Angeles have lost as many games as they've won since Manny Ramirez swapped his Red Sox for Dodger Blues last week at the trade deadline, but it's not because the 11-time all-star isn't producing. So far, Manny is completely locked in, putting up ridiculous numbers: 13 for 23, four homers and nine RBI's. 

Ramirez, who is still considering a request from manager Joe Torre to conform to a team rule and clean up his long locks, is happy enough with his new environment to announce that he believes he'll finish his career in LA. The Dodgers have the best bullpen in the National League, and a fairly decent starting rotation — their biggest problem in 2008 has been offence, as it has often been for an organisation that regularly seems to be blessed with strong arms and cursed with weak sticks. Manny is the tonic, and though it's impossible for him to keep hitting at that sort of clip, even if he slips from white hot to red hot, the wins will eventually come for Torre's Dodgers.

Arizona, a team that that looked flawless at the start of the season, jumping out to a 20-8 record, and then sputtering ever since, will have to recapture that April magic to make it to October for the second consecutive season. 

So half of one of the best one-two hitting punches of all time has left Boston, and life goes on. Jason Bay, his replacement, is so far so good, while in Pittsburgh, the other team involved in the three-way-deal, little has changed, except that on Wednesday, pitcher Jeff Karstens came within just a few outs of throwing a perfect game. All parties, it seems, are moving on from the events surrounding the Manny deal. I, for some bizarre reason, have not, and that is because of one man – Curt Schilling. 

I shouldn't allow myself to get all riled up because of a few typically asinine statements made by Schilling as Manny was heading out the door, but the Red Sox pitcher is so irritating, so infuriating, that more than a week later, I feel the need to use this space to get these feelings off my chest. Baseball fans know that the currently injured Schilling, who has had an excellent big league career, punctuated by his success in the post-season, loves to talk. In fact, the self-important Schilling will offer up an opinion on almost anything at any time, and that's why I wanted to title this week's blog 'Curt Schilling should shut the fuck up'. 

This is, of course, problematic. First of all, it's not the job of the writer to come up with headlines; that's the task of the editors. Secondly, the legal team at The Guardian might be slightly concerned about the ramifications of such a headline. Finally, free speech is as important a right as any that we have, so while I would very much like for Curt to shut the fuck up, he should be able to say what ever he feels. That way, more and more baseball fans will find out what I believe is true: that Curt Schilling is a self-righteous … you fill in the blank. 

What did Schilling say that's got me so het up? I'll get to that. But first, some context. Over the years, he's been known to communicate more than your average North American athlete. He has a blog at 38pitches.com, and a weekly radio gig in Boston. Schilling talks a lot, especially for someone who is not currently playing. There should be a rule that says you cannot talk as much when you're not playing. 

When he was playing last year, Curt Schilling managed to draw up sympathy for a baseball persona-non-grata such as Barry Bonds by launching an attack on the slugger that was so inappropriate that he was forced to issue a statement of apology. 

This is the same Curt Schilling who was shot over and over by television cameras covering his head with a towel, unable to watch his Phillies teammate, the erratic Mitch "Wild Thing" Williams, pitch in big spots during the 1993 World Series v Toronto - talk about showing up a teammate. 

Schilling also likes to talk politics, which, rightly or wrongly, I don't like to hear about from athletes. It's probably not a great idea to openly campaign for a politician when your employer, who pays you, is campaigning for the opponent, which happened in the 2004 presidential election. Maybe it's better to keep your slant to yourself in that situation. Maybe it's better to just pitch. 

Schilling is very much into the team concept, berating players such as Ramirez for not buying in to it. However, from where I'm standing, Schilling is more interested in getting his opinion out than being part of the team. On July 31, hours before the trade deadline, Schilling was on WEEI in Boston for his weekly gig, offering up his thoughts on the distractions Manny was causing, saying that the slugger should probably be traded. 

I found it outrageous, if not surprising, that Schilling, who is not a fan, and who is under contract with the Red Sox, was busy discussing internal business as Red Sox brass were busy trying to figure out how or if they were going to trade one of the best hitters in franchise history. Even if everybody in Boston felt that Manny should go, that doesn't mean that players should get on the air and shout it out. That's not how things are done, unless you are, of course, named Curt Schilling. 

Not content with battering Manny who, despite his faults (and we all have faults), was the best offensive player on the team that broke an 86-year title drought, Schilling then went after Pedro Martinez, another all-time great ex-teammate, saying: "I enjoyed pitching with Pedro, but I watched Pedro for a year come and go as he pleased, and do whatever he pleased, from a schedule standpoint and to a point, All-Star break heading home and no one ever said a word … The things that Pedro said going out of town about Terry [Francona], that crushed me because of what I saw Tito do for him. Manny's the same way ... " 

What's crushing me is that I have to hear from this guy constantly. Curt Schilling was a vital piece of two championship teams in Boston, and one in Arizona; an exceptional pitcher who's won over 200 big league games. Unfortunately, it's his mouth that I'll remember most.
