Yankee Stadium's ghosts, unwilling to go quietly into the night, fought successfully to keep the spotlight trained on the storied diamond well into the morning. The final All-Star Game to be played on the south side of River Avenue was a contest worthy of the grand occasion – both American and National League teams made dramatic late-inning plays (bar Dan Uggla), adding to the Bronx stadium's legacy with its latest and possibly last signature event. When the AL's Justin Morneau beat Corey Hart's valiant throw to the plate in the bottom of the 15th inning, the scoreboard read 1:37am, the stadium had finally surrendered, capping a historic evening that included all the baseball bells and whistles one could ask for. 

The opening ceremonies were stirring. Forty-nine Hall-of-Famers made the pilgrimage to pay their respects to Yankee Stadium, forming what was called the greatest assembly of living baseball immortals. To see them in the flesh, introduced one by one, was, at least for me, one of the more memorable baseball events I've witnessed. There were players I watched as a kid, Mike Schmidt, Eddie Murray, Cal Ripken Jr, George Brett, Gary Carter, and then more vintage greats such as Hank Aaron, Willie Mays and Yogi Berra, a Yankee that even their most ardent haters can't help but adore. 

Then they brought out The Boss—Yankees owner George M Steinbrenner III, who is rarely seen these days. He appeared on his field, in his stadium, the post-renovation version of the venue he dominated for over 30 years. The Yankees have won 10 pennants and six titles during his reign, one unlike any the North American sports world has ever seen. The seasons of drama and trauma look as if they've taken their toll on the now frail 78-year-old Yankees owner – overwhelmed with emotion, it seemed like he knew that this might be both his and the stadium's swan song. 

Once the field was cleared of legends past, the game was played at a furious pace, until Billy Wagner blew the save, and with it, the NL's best chance to win their first All-Star Game since 1996. The teams would ultimately use 63 players as the game stalled and the clock ticked, moving into uncharted All-Star territory. 

In the bottom of the 10th inning, the AL loaded the bases, courtesy of two consecutive errors by Dan Uggla, who suffered through one of the single worst performances in All-Star Game history. Pitcher Aaron Cook was his guardian angel, putting forth an MVP type performance in escaping the tightest of jams – the score remained tied, 3-3. 

That dreaded word, tie, loomed larger as innings passed. The Commissioner of Baseball, Bud Selig, squirmed in his seat as scoring opportunities were squandered. In the 15th, with both teams down to their final pitcher, Michael Young's sacrifice fly bailed out Selig, ending the game, and any threat of a repeat of the 2002 debacle in Milwaukee when both teams ran out of players and the game ended in a deadlock. 

Luckily for Major League Baseball, history didn't repeat itself – but what if it had? The winner of the All-Star Game determines which league gets home field advantage in the World Series, so there has to be a result. Would they have flipped a coin? How about using away-runs scored as a tie-breaker? Most extra base hits? Fewest errors committed? In reality, it's likely position players would have been summoned to pitch so that the game could carry on – farcical. It's time to re-evaluate how World Series home field advantage is determined, sooner rather than later. 

As far as the pre-All-Star Game calendar goes, New York wasn't exactly overwhelmed by the events. There was a Bon Jovi concert in Central Park, and All-Star Game regulars such as Fan Fest and the Red Carpet Parade that marched players down Sixth Avenue. The Home Run Derby turned Texas' Josh Hamilton into a New York cult hero as he hit a first-round record 28 Bronx bombs including one that hit the back wall in right field, 502 feet away. While it was fun to watch Hamilton, the Derby was mostly a dud, lacking a marquee name such as Alex Rodriguez. Thing is, New York is just way too big for a multi-day event such as All-Star Week to take it over completely, as it did two years ago in Pittsburgh and last season in San Francisco. In a city with a million other things to do, I missed the buzz and energy that you get when the All-Star Game host city is covered in wall-to-wall baseball - the Big Apple swallows it up whole.

Even if there was a different vibe on the city streets this year, there's no denying the historical importance of having the game played here in New York. Now that it's finally over, Yankees fans await the season's second half, one which will determine whether or not they get the stadium send off they really want – a 27th World Series title.
