It's a boiling hot Tuesday night in Queens and the Mets are at home playing the Arizona Diamondbacks. The New Yorkers are attempting to recover from their latest set of disastrous results—a four-game sweep that included three consecutive 2-1 defeats to the struggling Padres in San Diego. In the series finale, the Mets all-star closer, Billy Wagner, blew a two-run eighth inning lead to complete their west coast trouncing. Tonight the home team is up 5-1, perhaps this is the start of a turnaround in what's been a tumultuous 2008, a season in which the Mets were expected to reverse all that went wrong last year. 

In sports, there are few things worse than a franchise completely falling short of expectations. When it happens, everything around that team turns toxic, and fans at Shea Stadium have been covered in thick poisonous clouds for some time now. It was a lot more fun in New York in 2006 when the club won 97 games and came within a game of reaching the World Series. When Carlos Beltran struck out in Game Seven, sending underdog St. Louis to the Fall Classic, it was a tough pill to swallow. However, most Mets fans believed it was the beginning of a run that would offer many more opportunities at a title. Today however, it looks as if that the window of opportunity slammed shut with the Cardinals Yadier Molina's two-run, ninth inning homer. 

Undeterred, manager Willie Randolph's Mets stormed out of the following Spring Training and played like the first place team that fans, management, players and national press predicted they were. New York was crowned NL champs even before a pitch was thrown, hype that seemed appropriate as the Amazins' streaked to a 35-19 start. Then, as the season went on, the team slowly lost its swagger, and before long, the Mets were losing as much as they were winning. Their fans still can't quite figure out how they made the mysterious transformation into a measly .500 team, but an unjustified sense of entitlement amongst the players is a good place to start. Their downturn snowballed into the single worst regular-season collapse in baseball history as the Mets blew a seven game lead with 17 games to go. 

The manager and General Manager, Omar Minaya, both survived the debacle, ensuring the fans that the franchise would move on and not suffer any hangovers from throwing away a division title. Their acquisition of superstar pitcher Johan Santana sent a clear signal to the players and the fan base that 2008 would be different, but here we are in June, and little has changed at Shea Stadium. 

It's crisis time in Queens, the Mets have just given away that four run lead, courtesy of a bullpen meltdown. It's their fifth straight loss, one that looks eerily familiar to Mets fans. It's the kind of defeat that makes your heart drop to your ankles — with the club coming home, it seemed like the ideal time to heal, to start fresh, to finally prove that the 2008 Mets could play the way the baseball world expected the Mets to play. Instead, fans, players and management left Shea shaking their heads yet again, trying to figure out why the team is a mediocre 82-80 over the previous 162 games, and why this has become the most frustrating period in Mets history. 

Some believe it's the manager's fault. Citing his laid back managerial style and his players lack of energy, a contingent of press and fans called for his head after miserable road trip in late May that included an embarrassing four-game sweep in Atlanta. Willie Randolph was summoned to meet face to face with ownership and General Manager Omar Minaya, but the skipper emerged from the boardroom with the support of team brass. New York put together a run of five victories in six games shortly thereafter, a stretch that provided hope, but ultimately proved to be another false start. 

There have been significant injury issues to contend with as well. Corner outfielder Ryan Church, arguably their best player thus far, is out with post-concussion syndrome. Moises Alou, their oft-injured aging outfielder, one of the only Mets to perform down the stretch last season, has predictably been unavailable for most of the year. Angel Pagan, who was playing well in a backing up Alou is also out. Second baseman Luis Castillo has been dogged by knee injuries. Pitcher Pedro Martinez only recently returned after suffering an injury to his hamstring in his first start, while hurler Orlando Hernandez is still rehabbing from a foot injury. 

Minaya has been shielded from much of the fury, but after all, the GM put this team together. With huge dips in production over the last three seasons, this was bound to be a rock bottom year for Carlos Delgado. Should he have found a way to replace the expensive first baseman? How about acquiring more depth in the outfield knowing that Alou is constantly hurt? The bullpen is similar to the one that struggled in '07—could he have shored up the relief core? Minaya has made some superb moves during his tenure, but he's left with a sub-par team, struggling to stay afloat in the NL East. 

There is blame to be spread across the entire Mets organization, and no simple answers on where to go from here. What will come of these Mets? If we listen to the manager and his players, we'll hear that there's a lot of baseball left, that long winning streaks are around the corner. Meanwhile, fans living off the dated perception of the Mets as a baseball superpower are being talked off the ledge daily. The $138 million Mets are losing ugly and often. Yes, there's still time to salvage this season and get back into the race with the surging Philadelphia Phillies, but it's getting harder and harder to make a case for the Amazin' mess after a yearlong trend of mediocre baseball. 
