These may not traditionally be baseball's glamour teams, but who cares? In MLB teams grind like heck for eight months to roll into the playoffs, and so we've got the two best playing in the World Series. Both the Phillies and the Rays have so many positive vibes right now, they won't let that be spoiled by what some perceive as disappointing TV ratings.

The series is too close to call, but I think it's a great match-up and could well go to seven games, with two very differing sets of players posing very differing challenges for each other. The advance scouts will be hugely important because these teams haven't played each other – the pitchers don't know the hitters and the hitters don't know the pitchers. There's a curiosity there for that reason.

That said, neither team will be frightened of what the World Series has in store for them. From the American League, Tampa Bay is capable of playing a National League game because they have speed, defense and something to offer from the bench. The NL's Philadelphia conversely should be competent at the AL game because they have a couple of suitable candidates for the designated-hitter role.

Tampa's turnaround this season has been staggering, as we know. At the start of the year they attacked the two things that teams need – pitching and defense. You never know at what rate young pitchers will develop, so what you try to do is make good evaluations of players, trust your evaluations and let it play out over the season. Tampa have been fortunate that four or five young pitchers have blossomed at the same time. People also underestimate what an excellent defensive team they've become – and they're going to play four games on astroturf, which could well be an advantage for them. Similarly, their young batting talent has all blossomed at the same time, players such as Evan Longoria and BJ Upton. Joe Maddon, the manager, deserves credit for that as he has created the perfect atmosphere for youngsters to excel.

Philly also have the right manager for their team in Charlie Manuel – he has guided his players expertly through the regular and post-season. Their middle order of Chase Utley, Ryan Howard and Jimmy Rollins is pretty special, while the likes of Pat Burrell, Shane Victorino and Jason Werth have all made valuable contributions. Like the Rays they, too, have had a young pitcher bloom this year – Cole Hamels. But equally important have been the parts played by Ryan Madson and closer Brad Lidge, who have both been so consistently successful in the eighth and ninth that they have effectively shortened their games to seven innings.

But the most important man to emerge recently is Tampa Bay's left-handed relief pitcher-turned-closer, David Price, whose appearance puts a different dynamic on the series. Philly is the more established team, but Tampa Bay have been through too many wars not to be considered World Series class. A word of warning for Rays fans should they win, however – last year Arizona also had young players who did great things and everyone thought they'd be there forever. But it hasn't happened for them and the Rays' youngsters, working under a different mindset to this year, will find it equally difficult next April.

