That's it. 85 years of history is done. Over. Kaput. Following the Bronx Bombers defeat of the Baltimore Orioles on Sunday night, Yankee Stadium is officially closed…well almost. In November there'll be a ceremony that will pay respect to other, non-baseball events that have taken place inside the House That Ruth Built. Yankee Stadium wasn't simply a one-trick-pony. In addition to being the most historic baseball venue on the planet, the Bronx ballpark housed some pretty good footballers as well. New York Giants gridiron greats such Frank Gifford and Sam Huff called Yankee Stadium home, but you're probably more familiar with a Brazilian player called Pelé. 

I know at least two people who counted Yankee Stadium as more of a place to watch top-flight football than a baseball park. My father and grandfather used to walk across the Bronx to watch big clubs in town to make a few bucks, similar to the off-season tours we see today. Dad, an ardent Yankee-hater who hasn't been inside the Stadium for a baseball game in close to a half a century, watched Pelé play for the NASL's Cosmos in 1976, and ten years earlier, saw him score for Santos as they beat up Inter Milan 4-1. 

In an era where opportunities to watch world-class footballers were few and far between in the United States, father and son were back in the stadium two years later to watch Pelé and Eusébio do battle in a 3-3 draw between Benfica and Santos. It doesn't get much better in terms of star-quality, never mind that Carlos Alberto was also in the House on that September day. 

Yeah, I know, you didn't click here to read about football, this is a baseball blog. However, I felt that sport obsessed readers like yourselves might find interest in the fact that that both Babe Ruth and Pelé, arguably the best players of all-time in their respective endeavours, both once called Yankee Stadium home, a lesser known detail of the River Avenue park's history. 

Back to baseball and last Sunday, when an event that for a year was billed as the "last regular season game at Yankee Stadium" became simply "the last game at Yankee Stadium". Who would have guessed that there would be no play-off games at Yankee Stadium for the first time since 1993 — the Evil Empire has October off following a disappointing season in which the AL East was turned on its head and the sky fell. 

Actually, in Tampa Bay, there is no sky, at least inside the Rays indoor Tropicana Field, site of one of the most shocking one-year turnarounds in Major League Baseball history. Just a season ago Tampa Bay was a laughing stock, a franchise with nine last-place finishes in ten seasons. Today, manager Joe Maddon's team is enjoying a two-game lead over the Boston Red Sox, who are also secured of a play-off berth, heading into the final weekend of the regular season. The Bosox probably won't catch the Rays and win the east, but that won't keep their fans from the fun of reminding the Yankees, who are in Boston to finish out the season, of who's going to the playoffs and who's going home. 

Shea Stadium, the 44-year-old Queens home of the Mets, also set to close at the end of the season, is clinging to life as the Amazin's continue in their bid to fulfill their fans fantasy of seeing their park up and running in October while Yankee Stadium is dark. New York is competing with Philadelphia and Milwaukee to clinch one of the two available play-off spots — one team will be left out of the post-season picture, bringing some classic pennant race baseball to the last weekend of the regular season, and perhaps, beyond. There are several complicated, tie-breaking scenarios heading into the final three games, many of which will include the possibility of play-in games on Monday, or even Tuesday. The play-offs begin on Wednesday. 

It's a bit more straight forward in LA where the Angels won their fourth AL West title in five years two weeks ago, while up north, manager Joe Torre's Dodgers clinched the NL West title yesterday, completing their Manny Ramirez-led revival. 

That leaves the AL Central Division, which may have the best race going. Minnesota and Chicago are neck and neck after the Twins completed a dramatic, three-game sweep of the visiting White Sox on Thursday. Curiously, with the Sox up 2.5 in the standings heading into Minnesota, their manager Ozzie Guillen, who runs his mouth like no other skipper in the game, decided the time was right to call out his starting pitcher, Javier Vazquez. 

''He hasn't been [a big-game pitcher], that's the bottom line… What you see is what you get, Javy is going to be Javy. I just want him to be aggressive, throw the ball over the plate and knock somebody on their [butt]. That's a big three games for us… You have to be mean. Go out there and show them we show up to play, show up to kick your guys' [butts]. And believe me, that will take care of itself.''

In a season dogged by several Guillen-led controversies, including a number of run-ins with his players, and a storm surrounding a rubber sex doll, his bizarre decision to dig into one of his key hurlers, motivational tactic or not, set the tone for the series. 

Vazquez proved his boss correct on Tuesday, as he was ripped inside the Twins Metrodome, one of the toughest places for opponents to play in baseball. Their stunning sweep puts the Twins ahead in the standings, and in an ideal position with the lowly Kansas City Royals in town for their final three games. 

The Sox, who have played one fewer game than Minnesota, will face the Cleveland Indians, and if necessary will make-up a rained out game with Detroit on Monday. Should Minnesota take the central crown, it will rival the Rays ascension for baseball story of the year. A season after losing Torii Hunter, Johan Santana and Carlos Silva to free-agency, the Twins were supposed to be re-tooling in 2008. Instead, they may be heading back to the play-offs for the fifth time in seven seasons.
