Two hours before the G20 leaders tested each other over their Downing Street dinner last night, Michelle Obama gracefully resolved one of the conference's lesser controversies. What would the first lady wear to meet her veteran British counterpart, the Queen?

Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, the French president's wife, had decided to stay away, unwilling to be outshone by Michelle Obama, according to bitchier global analysis. President Kgalema Motlanthe of South Africa also emerged wifeless from his limousine for the royal reception at Buckingham Palace. So did King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, possibly for more practical reasons. His Mercedes S-class could not have contained more than a few of them.

In any case, most eyes in London were fixed on the American pair, so much more distinctive and glamorous then the average G20 summiteer. "How can you tell them [the leaders] apart?" as Prince Philip was later overhead confiding to the Obamas. He too is distinctive in his way.

At his mid-morning press conference with Gordon Brown, Barack Obama had hinted at domestic indecision in the wardrobe department. "Michelle is really thinking that through," the president remarked as he piled on praise for the Queen's "decency and civility". 

A few minutes early for their royal meeting - protocol dictates that fellow heads of state do not have mere audiences - Michelle Obama emerged from the Beast, the president's fortress of a Cadillac.

She was wearing a regal black coat. Beneath it were glimpses of a black skirt and cardigan over a white blouse and a double string of pearls. Critics of her sartorial informality, evident earlier in the day, could have no excuse for sniping.

Inside the palace, up to 150 guests, five each (including finance ministers) for the 19 delegations, plus EU, UN, IMF and other important acronyms, were greeted by a top royal line-up, including the Prince of Wales (his wife turned up), and the dukes of Edinburgh, York and Kent. The G20 celebs drank assorted wines and soft drinks in the state reception rooms and nibbled mini-Cornish pasties. 

Perhaps stung by suggestions that his gift of a box DVD set to Gordon Brown in Washington did not convey the requisite degree of warmth, the First Visitors brought a gift for the Queen that managed to combine thoughtfulness, modernity and a dash of history: an iPod loaded with video footage of her 2007 visit to Virginia. The Queen repayed the compliment with a very personal present of her own - a signed portrait of herself and Prince Philip.
