I grabbed breakfast and left the house early today in order to get a proper look at Barack Obama in the flesh. After all the adulation and the hatred, you have to reassure yourself the new president of the United States is just a man struggling to do his best.

Actually, he's Professor Obama, I decided after watching his 50-minute press conference with Gordon Brown: an eloquent professor who picks his words carefully and manages to drop in a quotable phrase in most answers, but a professor all the same. He once was one; he taught law.

What that means is that he thinks before he feels, unlike George Bush, unlike Bill Clinton, too, I suspect. Clinton was clever, too, clever in a law school way just like Obama, but his heart and other organs often took control of his brain. That's probably why a lot of people liked him and he lit up a room.

Obama did not light up the gilded pomp of the Locarno Room at the Foreign Office where the hacks had been waiting two hours, a security-driven feature of dealing with a US president for many years now. He looked tired – not much evidence of his famous cool on this occasion – and did not smile much, though he does do humour and made a couple of decent jokes.

Did you catch any of it on TV? I thought Brown was fine in his way, though he talks too much and lacks that knack of phrase-making. A world economic crisis is his subject, so the PM never sounds ignorant or silly. You just know he's going to gush a bit ("congratulations on the energy, dynamism and achievements") and quickly declare that "global problems require global solutions". A bit clunky.

Obama was clearly intent on rectifying any hurt feelings which Downing Street – and the easily-bruised Fleet Street media – were nursing after the slightly brusque treatment Brown received at the White House last month: all a bit hurried and perfunctory.

"Thank you very much, Gordon," he began, and went on from there through the morning's lovely London weather, Sarah Brown's kindness to Michelle and the conversation the world's leading public official had just had with the Brown children about dinosaurs. Expect a fiscal stimulus for reptiles in the G20 communique.

Whatever family hostility we suspect the half-Kenyan president harbours towards the British Empire – his autobiography contains several sharp passages – he buried it. War and peace, thick and thin, a kinship of ideals as well as interests ... he laid it on with a trowel, though not with discernible warmth.

Brown gave him a lot of eye contact, just as Obama had done while the PM was speaking. He repeated and endorsed most of the points Brown had made about the world's problems and how to restore them. "I'm here to listen" as well as explain my own views, he said, and remembered to mention British troops and their families who had suffered in US-UK-led wars.

When questions came, starting with one from the BBC's Nick Robinson, his answers were measured, slow even. Asked by Robinson to apportion blame for the financial meltdown, he said there had been a widespread "mismatch" between integrated capital markets and national regulation. "I am less interested in blame than in solutions."

Chums who work in Washington and are here on the presidential planes tell me he's tried being Angry Obama and Jokey Obama, but agree that Professor Obama is his default position, the one he's comfy with. So he tends to have one more afterthought.

He did it today at least three times, including answering the Sun's question about what he likes in London. "The Queen," he added as an afterthought, for her decency and civility. He is looking forward to meeting her.

The tone was emollient, though the core message was that other countries couldn't rely on the "voracious US consumer" to keep on buying their exports – Germany and China please note – unless they bought a few back. A good point. Half an hour in he looked at his watch and signalled movement to an aide while GB was talking, but proved more generous with his time than is often the case.

Seven questions were taken, quite good by travelling White House standards. Several times you could see him remembering to empathise with ordinary voters who are losing their jobs, homes, savings and (pause) pensions. "Don't short-change the future because of fear," was probably his best line.

My Washington chum says the shine is coming off him. He's trying to do too much, he's made it harder to get key players in his team confirmed by Congress because so many have tax problems which could have been sorted out. He's a bit like Tony Blair in 1997, the expectations raised too high to avoid disappointment, says chum.

Steady on, that's a bit harsh. I still see Obama as a man of greater substance, though he has yet to prove he can govern. Too soon to write him off – of course it is. But he's only a man. I've finally seen him close up. Getting up early was worth it, just for that.
