There are almost as many solutions to the problem of MPs' pay and allowances as there are MPs. Yet one thing which unites their opinions is a near-universal pessimism about the prospects of an agreement that would get this monkey off their collective back. 

"Whatever we replace it with will create new problems," the virtuous and unvirtuous assured each other after Gordon Brown intervened to chivvy the independent commission on standards in public life to expedite its investigation into MPs' expenses. Jacqui Smith's family video bill had just put the issue back on page one.

There is a cycle to political money rows. In the 1990s it was clandestine Tory outside interests - the likes of Neil Hamilton and Jonathan Aitken - which repeatedly hit the headlines. But prime ministers long gone, from Harold Wilson to Margaret Thatcher, had primed the expenses timebomb by letting MPs claim car mileage, mortgage costs and other allowances to offset the higher salaries.

One high-minded backbencher recalls replacing the small TV in his London flat. He bought a modest Panasonic and decided it was fair only to charge the taxpayer for half its cost. It was not a formula which found favour when he proposed it to colleagues. Another MP who denounced the habit of buying large "MPs cars" to facilitate maximum mileage claims was later warned he'd "never be forgiven".

In fact the growing professionalisation of politics has led to the steady improvement of standards and accountability. Media rows are part of the process. The Commons rules on outside interests have been tighter since the "sleaze" battles of 1996. 

Though MPs ducked sweeping reform of their allowances last July, a new regime starts today which requires more receipts and National Audit Office supervision of the audit.

When MPs voted in July, by 172 to 144, to defy party leaders and keep the "John Lewis" furniture list, a majority of members feebly abstained. Resentment against media leaks and deliberate misunderstandings (staff salaries are lumped in with curtains and TV sets as "perks") runs strong, as it does against media-friendly colleagues who play to the gallery but claim large expenses.

Some MPs have to juggle awkward ministerial jobs (and divorce), but others manage to commute way beyond outer London, to Brighton or Luton, without needing to claim any second home allowance. 

Pessimists are right to say a recession is no time to scrap living allowances in return for higher pay. It won't happen. 

The current cycle of controversy over allowances, not even mentioned when Lord Nolan first moved to clean up politics in 1995, started when Tory Michael Trend was forced to repay £70,000 worth of housing allowance in 2002 - and step down. It went ballistic after Derek Conway's family employment habits came to light last year. "We're not like that," most MPs insist.
