Oh dear, fighting at the Palace of Westminster, and this time it's the hacks in trouble again. Thank goodness I left Eric Pickles's party before they started. Drink and politics, it's a heady brew, as the Guardian's report confirms this morning.

But the miracle is not that it happens, but that it happens so rarely, as Alastair Campbell and I once discovered.

What journalists do to each other is usually of little importance or interest (except to other journalists) unless – as rumoured overnight – they're buying up stolen details of MPs' expenses with which to titillate their customers as the world economy totters.

No, it's the behaviour of elected politicians that matters. Racking my brains, I can only recall witnessing one potentially serious incident between members on the floor of the Commons and that is 30 years ago.

Norman Tebbit, then an ambitious young Thatcherite, made a remark which offended Tom Swain, a Labour MP who had been both a miner and a fairground boxer. Though he must have been over 60 by then, Swain looked like a man who still knew how to throw a punch.

So when he invited the future cabinet minister outside, Tebbit sensibly stayed put. There are two red stripes, two sword lengths apart, on the Commons carpet, to inhibit physicality: MPs are not meant to cross them when speaking. Tommy Swain crossed the line that night, so I recall.

Not much of a story. It's true Bernadette Devlin, the republican MP from West Belfast, slapped the then-home secretary Reggie Maudling in the early 70s and that Ted Heath got his first job in Churchill's whips' office 20 years earlier because his predecessor kicked a stubborn MP downstairs.

But these are rare events, the product of great passions such as the Irish home rule controversy that disrupted the Commons a great deal in the late 19th century. In 1856 shortly before the American civil war, Charles Sumner, the Massachusetts senator and prominent opponent of slavery, was attacked on the Senate floor by a member of the House of Representatives, South Carolina's Preston Brooks.

So savage was Brooks' use of his heavy cane that Sumner suffered brain and spinal injuries that kept him away from Congress for three years. Brooks was treated as a hero in the south, but he only stiffened abolitionist sentiment.

Parliament has never suffered such an incident, and nowadays is greatly feminised by the presence of 100-plus women MPs and the abandonment of long sitting hours. In 2005 Jim Dowd was said to have been involved in a fracas with Bob Marshall-Andrews, a fellow Labour MP, during a tense moment.

"Here's another faggot," BM-A is supposed to have shouted, though the QC later claimed it was "another faggio", which as everyone knows is Italian slang for a menial assistant ie someone voting for his own government. Dowd is actually neither.

What happened last night then? I thought you'd never ask. Eric Pickles, the genial Yorkshireman who is now Tory party chairman, held a "spring drinks reception" for the hacks in the shadow cabinet room somewhere below Big Ben. Charles I's portrait hangs on the wall, but only when the Tories are in opposition. Labour tends to the Cromwellian.

I popped in for half an hour or so after finishing work around 8pm. It seemed quiet, respectable even, though I was surprised to see that among those invited were the Daily Mail columnist Melanie Phillips and Janet Daley of the Daily Telegraph. There would have been no need for CS spray if those two tough ladies had still been around to restore order when the party ended.

Anyway, I went home for my cup of cocoa and early night, leaving the young bucks – which ones I don't yet know – to embark upon a political disagreement which spilled out into the corridor. Not being political reporters with passes, or known to the police, they got into trouble.

The house was still sitting and the security staff have been jittery ever since pro-hunters sneaked their way into the chamber from behind the Speaker's chair – near where last night's party was held. I suppose we could be pleased to discover young people still getting passionate about politics.

It is a micro-incident which should now be closed. But I should add for completeness that the then-Daily Mirror political editor Alastair Campbell and I had a similar experience, trading blows the night Robert Maxwell died, 5 November 1991.

More than enough has been written about that mythologised incident too, including a 10th anniversary article by me. Google appears to throw up 19,000 references, which seems quite enough. Alastair and I were duly sent a gentle letter of reprimand by Speaker Bernard Weatherill, a nice fellow. We were both at fault that day, as is often so in these cases.
