Stuart Wheeler, the Tory donor sacked for writing a cheque to Ukip to finance its European elections campaign, is a clever man and, in my experience, a very nice one too. But in this instance he again strikes me as politically naive.

This is puzzling to me. Eton, Oxford, a stint in the Welsh Guards, a law degree and a stint in merchant banking: these are not unworldly qualifications. Neither is founding the hugely successful IG Index, the pioneering spread betting firm, nor being a gambling mate of Jimmy Goldsmith, John Aspinall and Lord Lucan, all of them colourful, all of them dead. 

Unlike Daniel Hannan MEP, over whose mega-viral Strasbourg speech I clashed with the blogosphere last week, Stuart Wheeler is a man of the world, moderately rich, self-made, at 73 probably a grandfather by now. So what was this long-time Tory donor (£5m last time round), thinking when he wrote a cheque to Ukip, whose collective CV includes few of the above qualities? After all, he promised to back the Tories at the next general election and at the local ones too.

Very decent of him. But backing a rival party in words, deeds or chequebook, is always potentially a hanging offence in most parties. It strikes at the very heart of a party's rationale: claiming to be right and seeking to get elected. Those who flirted with – or joined – Goldsmith's Referendum party, which did John Major a lot of harm in the 90s, were often kicked out. Obviously Lady T could not be treated that way.

"If they kick me out I will understand. I will be very sorry about it but it won't alter my stance," Wheeler told the Times yesterday.

The Tory hierarchy hesitated until late afternoon – rightly so, it's a tricky one – then expelled him, though I cannot help but notice that this decision was announced several hours after Tim Montgomerie, the brains behind the ConservativeHome website advised (do I mean "instructed"?) party chairman, Eric Pickles, to take a tough line.

This is a tricky one for David Cameron who is now facing challenges at the European elections on June 4 from Ukip and Libertas (at least in theory), not to mention from Paul Judge's Jury Team (also in theory) and the BNP which – in fairness to posters who make this point to me – is also trawling for disaffected Labour voters. The BNP could be the story of the night unless UKIP gets an undeserved second wind.

Cameron has a narrow path to tread, seeking to win the moderate middle ground without alienating core supporters on the right for whom Europe is one of several touchstone issues. I have argued that the Tory leader is getting this wrong.

While the tactical advantages of leaving the European People's party (EPP) are obvious, in the longer term a Cameron government is going to need Europe and need to compromise with it. Hey, get real, chaps: China and India are coming. No amount of voting for Ukip is going to change that fact. We have to be smart and adapt or we will all suffer. 

Meanwhile the Economist reports that in the Tory search for allies poor William Hague has had to meet with a Latvian nationalist party, some of whose members "attend ceremonies to commemorate a Latvian unit of Waffen SS troops". These Baltic local customs can easily be misunderstood in Chipping Norton, where the Lib Dems might benefit from any fallout.

Wheeler strikes me as locked in a more romantic vision of the past which is fast fading. He took the government to court in a doomed attempt to force it to stage a referendum on the Lisbon treaty which would have created (among other things) a permanent EU presidency instead of the current rotation. 

Since then the Czech government, Eurosceptic as it happens, has collapsed, leaving a hole in the EU's centre at a dangerous time. Could the euro collapse under its increasingly obvious internal strains? Possibly. Could the EU collapse? Unlikely. Could it become enfeebled? Probably.

Wheeler would probably cheer this on, but he'd be wrong. We can all see – well, most of us – what's wrong with Europe. It's too weak as well as too bossy, tries to do too much too badly. But its collapse would not serve its interest – or ours. I just don't think he gets all this, nor grasps the scale of the revolutionary upheaval that would be needed to usher in such drastic change. Do they teach revolution at Eton?

I've met Wheeler a few times; he even invited me to a dinner at his Mayfair penthouse once, which is a decent thing for a Tory of his stamp to do for a Guardianista and oik. Hence my belief that he is a nice person, certainly admirably courteous. But that was the summer of the Tory leadership contest where he supported first Liam Fox, then David Davis against his fellow-Etonian. When he asked me why he should not support Fox, I fear I replied that I thought him a political idiot.

In the event Fox made rather a good leadership speech at the Tory conference – albeit that his plea for forgotten minorities like the mentally ill, were overshadowed by smoothy-chops's more successful pitch to voters. 

Wheeler backed him against my advice. 'Nuff said. And, by the way, the bookies are taking punters' money on Dan Hannan being next leader of the Tory party. Yeah, right. There ought to be a law against it.

