It is almost 19 years since Margaret Thatcher's leadership tottered when her newfangled local poll tax triggered riots and looting from Trafalgar Square into London's West End. So yesterday's peaceful announcement of a 3% average rise in English council tax - 3.9% in Wales - must be judged a rare tax triumph for Gordon Brown's cash-strapped team.

It did not stop ritual protests after amiable John Healey, the local government minister, confirmed the figures and reminded town halls (not that they needed reminding) that he will cap "excessive increases" that voters don't want - and can't afford. 

"Insult to injury," declared the Conservative spokeswoman, Caroline Spelman, who brazenly urged ministers to copy Alex Salmond's decision to freeze council tax bills.

Council tax must be replaced, added the Lib Dems, who favour a local income tax, as did Salmond until he got cold feet. Fat chance of that; it would give far too much autonomous revenue to councillors. The tax is here to stay, irritatingly visible (voters prefer taxes they can't see), but no longer a nightmare.

A £41 average increase ("79p a week, less than a loaf of bread") is not the stuff of riots, which are, in any case, focusing on next week's G20. Contrary to propaganda from the TaxPayers' Alliance, councils of all political stripes have been doing better in managing their services (without cuts) and improving their purchasing policies; certainly better than Whitehall departments. There are still problems. The Tories staged a Commons debate midweek to protest about the £20bn a year business rate, nowadays fixed from Whitehall and fiendishly complicated in its various applications. It is due to rise by 5% at a time when many firms are being hard hit by the recession. Ministers are easing the burden, the opposition wants more done. After all, there are local elections on 4 June.

Plummeting inflation rates (the RPI dropped to 0% this week) reinforce cries of unfairness. Yet it has different impacts on different groups, tolerable for council workers who got a 2.75% arbitration award, less so for councils with surpluses not invested in Iceland.

Like everyone else, town halls are braced for falling revenue (tiny Stevenage expects to lose £250,000 on car parking fees) and rising costs, social services bearing the strain of marital breakdown for instance, at a time when successive scandals call for better care for children, the elderly and disabled people.

George Osborne's response to such challenges has been to offer a Salmond-esque two-year council tax freeze, provided councils keep their annual rise below 2.5%. That should hardly be difficult when most are already bunched around 3%, and some flagship Tory councils are on 0%, minus 3% in Hammersmith. But old hands who remember Thatcher's promise to "set councils free" know it was quickly followed by a draconian squeeze. Will Osborne start a new race to the bottom?
