Jack Straw's newly published draft bribery bill ticks a lot of boxes for those concerned about the persistent failure of assorted British law enforcement agencies to prosecute villains for all sorts of economic crimes.

As the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development once noted, it is surprising that one of the world's top three financial centres rarely yields a prosecution, let alone a solid conviction. The US authorities, much more robust, are equally unimpressed.

At first glance, the justice secretary has stayed on the right side of campaigners for a cleaner arms trade abroad and more wholesome habits at home by embracing much of the Law Commission's most recent report, last November - the latest in a string of anti-corruption reviews going back at least a decade.

Straw wants to abandon old distinctions between principals and agents and focus on the promise or offer of a bribe to induce improper conduct. Crucially, in light of the BAE bribery investigation, it extends the UK law's reach to activities by firms or their subsidiaries abroad.

As a gesture towards the BAE investigation, stopped by the attorney general in 2006 on national security grounds, the AG's consent would no longer be required. So far so good, and Straw has been assured that the main opposition parties would help see a bill through parliament after consultation.

But several practical difficulties arise. Some MPs worry that the clause that would lift parliamentary privilege on incriminating remarks made by an MP or peer (so they could be used in a prosecution) might inhibit free speech. More important, Dominic Grieve, Straw's Tory shadow, twitched when he saw a proposed corporate offence of "corporate negligence" in bribery matters.

The intention is clear: to prevent or discourage firms from turning a blind eye to what their minions might be doing. But, as with corporate manslaughter, on which Labour also dithered for years, carelessness is a slippery legal issue. How do you prove intention?

As with this week's green paper on Labour's new bill of rights, there is a more practical political objection to the draft bill: a general election is no more than 14 months or so away. No one in Whitehall is suggesting that the bill will enter the legislative sausage machine this side of the Queen's speech in (probably) November. It is asking a lot of critics to believe such a tricky bill can get through both houses in a torrid election run-up. 

Corporate interests and practical politics will guarantee that a further weakness - a lack of extra resources for reorganisation of rival agencies (Serious Fraud Office, National Criminal Intelligence Service, etc) - is conspicuous by its absence. The OECD and other critics identify it as part of the problem.

So after years of foot-dragging in Whitehall, wily Straw may be accused again of going through the motions as this government runs out of steam. He has endured worse. One in the in-tray to test David Cameron's resolve?
