Of all the depressing details which emerged about politicians' expenses this week the one which troubled me most was not Jacqui Smith's 88p bath plug or Sinn Féin trousering nearly £500,000 in MPs' housing allowance from their British oppressors.


No, it was the claim that Tony Blair was paid €200,000 – roughly £180,000 at current exchange rates – for a half-hour speech in the Philippines. Twice.


I'm told the figure is "greatly exaggerated", as such figures often are. Either way it isn't the fact that the former prime minister can command large sums for speaking engagements. If rich people want to shell out to hear him, that's their business.


No, it was the idea that he was doing it in the Philippines which got to me.


I know the place a little – just a few of its 7,000 islands – having covered the overthrow of Ferdinand Marcos there in 1986 for the Guardian. I had my pocket picked as I battled my way through the crowd squeezing into Manila's Malacanang Palace to inspect Imelda's shoe collection: 600 pairs, no less. I never got to see any of them.


Friendly people Filipinos, but also poor people whose pockets have been picked long and hard by their own elite.


Always coy about his earnings – reportedly £15m since leaving office, what with books, banking and blagging – Blair's people tell me the reported fees for his 36-hour visit to Manila was "greatly exaggerated", which apparently means they were less than half what appeared in the press.


Good, but it's still too much money for a well-heeled European to take out of one of Asia's poorer countries. The Sunday Times claims that TB is now commanding more than Bill Clinton; surprising if true.


Back in the early 1950s the Philippines was widely expected to become the first of the Asian tiger economies, smaller states following Japan's developmental lead. Instead, it fell to a kleptocracy under Marcos, leaving South Korea and Taiwan to become South Korea and Taiwan.


Since there are repeated hints that Blair is still interested in becoming the EU's first full-time president (two terms totalling five years is the proposed maximum) he may be busy trying to make hay while he can, although the Europe job is not penury either.


I remain sceptical either that he really wants to do the job or that EU comrades would have such a skilful grandstander who might put their own lights into relative darkness. In any case, the small matter of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by Ireland (and several others) lies between Blair and any such hope.


Why has he been popping up in Britain this week, I wonder? No change in his plans, just coincidence, Blair aides insist (he's not planning a comeback). Blair is being interviewed about his faith on Radio 3 at 11 tonight, by classy Joan Bakewell, too.


He also gave an interview to Attitude magazine which generated some ink.


That was because Blair appeared to be lecturing his spiritual guide, Pope Benedict XVI, on the need to rethink his "entrenched" hostility to homosexuality. Most Catholics no longer feel that way about gay people, the new Catholic convert breezily explained.


Apparently Pope Benny (TB refers only to the Catholic "leadership") does view such things as saving the world from homosexual misbehaviour as being as important as saving the rainforests. But Pope Tony's magnificent self-confidence is comic, too, in its way as he thunders against an over-literal interpretation of the Old Testament, one unfit for the 21st century ("hordes of concubines and so on").


Blair told Attitude that organised religion is a bit like politics when facing change: "You can either hold to your core vote or you can say 'Let's accept that the world is changing' and work out that we can lead that change."


So there. The Man has spoken. And why didn't you think of that? You did? Then Manila may be waiting to hear from you, Manila envelope in hand.
