So, Sir Fred Goodwin's house has been attacked in the upmarket south Edinburgh suburb of Morningside where (so the old joke goes) folk are so grand they think sex is what the coal gets delivered in (I said it was old).

At this point, I fear we must appeal for calm and an end to the laughter, sound of popping corks and other expressions of unseemly delight at the prospect of the ex-RBS chief getting a taste of the middle-of-the-night distress his reckless conduct has caused to so many people he has never met.

On a practical note, early reports suggest that only three windows were broken, plus the rear window of a Mercedes S600 saloon parked in the drive. That's not many windows and the car may well have belonged to Sir Fred's cook who, for all we know, could be paid by RBS.

You think I'm joking? The Press Association quotes an RBS spokesman as saying: "We are aware of the incident but it is a matter for the police. There are security arrangements in place for Sir Fred, as is normal practice for departing executives. As we've said before, they will be reviewed in the coming months."

I read that as confirmation that RBS shareholders – that's mostly you and me – are indeed still paying for £700,000-a-year pensioner Fred the Shred's domestic security – and that those entrusted with such tasks are doing no better job than they did when simply running an overambitious bank.

But the real issue here is one of principle and the rule of law. People like Goodwin deserve to be protected from anything that smacks of mob rule, lynch mobs and other tempting options – including window smashing – precisely because their conduct has rendered them odious in the eyes of others.

For some absurdly optimistic reason I remain hopeful that due process in one form or another will catch up with Goodwin for some transgression, corporate, personal, fiscal, which his kind of buccaneer may just have committed in the past. Mills of God grinding slow etc etc.

In the meantime, we should all be patient. I know it's not fashionable and that someone is probably already pitching a "Stone Fred" gameshow for reality TV but we have enough trouble with legal corner-cutting, with vigilante sentiments and other bad habits, without wanting to encourage them.

By the same token, the US House of Representatives' vote to tax 90% of the ill-gotten gains of AIG executives is retrospective legislation that violates a basic principle that retrospection is almost invariably wrong; in this case it would unworkable too. We can usually rely on Congress to do the wrong thing.

But to end on a brighter note, Simon Hoggart has suggested that Fred should be required to collect his pension from the local post office (I'm sure they still have one in Morningside) and to do so every week.

All it would take is a minor rule change, not retrospective either. We could live with that, couldn't we, until something more substantial comes along?

Remember: saving the banking system, not retribution, is what matters.
