As public finances plunge further into the red, David Cameron and George Osborne are facing what the Tory historian Niall Ferguson likes to call a "trilemma", one shadow cabinet colleague explained last night.

"How do they keep their promises to cut the taxes which Tory voters hate? How do they show they are tough and capable politicians who can balance the books? And how do they do both while keeping their social consciences by helping the poorest?" he asked.

It is a high-wire trilemma that has generated U-turn headlines, anguished phone calls and Tory blogosphere chatter in the past few days, allowing Brown to jeer that Conservative policy is "that, in times of difficulty, the many should come to the aid of the few".

The Cameroons are acutely aware of this problem. When Cameron told supporters the other day that "the priority must go to debt reduction," he re-committed a Tory government to many of Brown's public spending pledges. Many critics think the Tories have been slow to adjust to the reality that there is no more money for some years to come. "In some ways the recession should have made it easier for David and George because no one will be looking for serious tax cuts for the next five years or so," says one Tory ex-Treasury minister.

But the party's ideological wing is restless. When Cameron and Osborne indicated that they might have to stick with Labour's 45p top rate of income tax (Alistair Darling put it into the fiscal works for post-election, 2011) militant bloggers at ConservativeHome got excited. Lord Tebbit and Boris Johnson unleashed themselves. Low-tax theorists don't feel comfortable with the huge monetary and fiscal stimuli which most governments, left and right, have deployed to undo damage done by Conservative-voting bankers. Tory party activists suspect that they, the Middle Britons, will pay for the bank rescue.

It is a powerful coalition that Dave and George know they must resist until polling day, 3 June 2010 at the latest. They will do so by saying enough to avoid being caught by their trilemma, but not enough to give dangerous hostages to fortune. The deft Blair-Brown team showed how between 1994 and 1997.

So when the heretical Clarke suggested on Sunday that Osborne's famous £2.4bn commitment to ease the inheritance tax and stamp duty thresholds was no more than an aspiration, he went too far. He was forced to recant, although party officials used the row to explain they would no longer do it on day one.

Just as well, because a £25k tax on wealthy non-doms, foreigners working in Britain, was meant to pay for it. How many are left? The Tories have many other promised tax cuts to finance for pensioners, married couples, and council tax payers. Yet experts predict that government borrowing will be a start-ling 11% of GDP in 2010 and Darling has already begun to squeeze future public spending and raise taxes.

The Cameroons have to square markets, voters, and activists too, aware that one seriously false move could still be fatal in these turbulent times.
