It's all too rare that we get the chance to praise American socialism in action at the practical level where can-do Americans function so well. Rare too that I type the word "football". But here it is, on page one of today's FT. So here goes.

The paper reports that Uefa, football's European governing body, is considering imposing a luxury tax on the continent's richest football clubs – Real Madrid, Manchester United, Porto, and their kind – in an effort to moderate their unhealthy dominance of the competitive leagues in which they play.

And where did they get this idea? From the US, where salary levels are capped for major league baseball teams and excess pay bills are taxed with the money going to help poorer teams.

Similar constraints exist in American football and basketball to limit the squad sizes that rich clubs could otherwise build up as their talent pool.

I know, I know, I never write about sport because I have no business inflicting my ignorance on readers. I can already hear Liverpool supporters muttering: "If it's all about money how come we're back in contention in Europe and the Premier League this month?"

But this isn't really about sport – not about how grown men move balls of varying sizes around defined spaces – it's about politics and fairness, both of which the American people have generally done pretty well since overthrowing King George III.

So it's worth reminding Europeans who tend to be snooty about American habits that one of the most openly redistributive processes in US public life concerns sport: the annual National Football League (NFL) draft whereby the weakest teams in the past season of American football get the first pick of the new players coming out of college teams – and vice versa.

I was astonished when I first encountered the phenomenon 20 or so years ago. Wasn't this one of the world's most commercialised sports in the world's most avowedly capitalist society where the prizes go to the fittest in a socially Darwinian contest?

Since then the draft has – in typically commercial fashion – been honed and refined into a major media event, the NFL's second biggest TV draw after the Super Bowl, the annual cup final.

The NFL's 32 teams choose in sequence, with 10 minutes to make a choice in round one, less in subsequent rounds. There are tactics involved (who will the others pick?) and conflicting factors. Do we want the best player – or the best quarterback because that's where we were weak last season? As in Happy Families, swaps are also allowed.

And so on. The TV build-up is appalling, but the fans can join in. The postmortems are extensive too. And, of course, things can go wrong. Instead of becoming a multimillionaire sporting hero, the season's first pick underperforms, busts his knee or goes to jail.

All this happens in April, five months before the season starts, which adds to the tension. I know a woman who was married to a Super Bowl hero (she's writing a book about the insane pressures and rewards), but one article I read by the FT's Alan Beattie gives the flavour.

What difference does it make? Well, eight teams can win the Super Bowl in 10 years as against seven teams winning the Spanish league in 50 years. It's increasingly the same story – with TV rights reinforcing inequality – across Europe. Money isn't everything, but the dominance of Man Utd, Chelsea and Arsenal at home would not survive serious Uefa efforts to make things fairer.

I realise it's difficult. So do Uefa officials who spoke to the FT. They've talked about this sort of stuff in the past, haven't they? Meanwhile, poorer clubs get poorer, thereby impoverishing the spirit of the game. Clubs in obscure FA-affiliated leagues have been complaining for years and years, but the rot is creeping up the system.

The other point worth reinforcing is that the United States is more complicated than the stereotype many of its critics paint. There is a stronger sense of equality there which persists despite the shocking plutocracy of recent decades that makes mockery of the opportunity society.

Barack Obama's election is surely a sign that Americans want to correct that mistake and his appeal to bankers to give back their bonuses taps into that feeling: it is reported this morning that 15 out of 20 top recipients at the AIG insurance giant (another example of US practical socialism: the taxpayer now virtually owns it) have agreed to hand the money back.

Will that happen here? A woman I met in Leeds the other day had been reading about Obama's hopes to restore the deep-rooted egalitarian subconscious of the American people. Fairer societies are healthier societies, we keep being reminded. "What worries me," she confided, "is that the English subconscious may be feudal."
