Nothing like a sex scandal in the political class to cheer up voters when the storm clouds of recession are darkening. Why, only the other week I had a learned discussion with a young female colleague who insisted that William Gladstone, the Grand Old Man of Victorian liberal politics, had been having his wicked way with those fallen women he liked to "rescue" in his spare time.

The evidence is far from certain, I insisted, having heard a few phoney Westminster sex scandals in my time, along with plenty of genuine ones. Do you remember the story about the two male Tory cabinet ministers of recent memory who were said to be at it hammer and tongs? I was once doing a TV interview in the street when one of their constituents asked me if I was going to mention it – and, if not, why not?

I said what Private Eye's Ian Hislop had advised me to say. "Bring me the evidence and i'll consider printing it," he would tell exponents of the hammer-and-tongs school. My instinct was more elementary. If two over-worked, middle-aged white men were that way inclined (I had no evidence to that effect) I rather doubted if they'd be attracted to someone they'd been bickering with across the cabinet table before lunch. Ed Balls and Yvette Cooper – Mrs Balls – may loyally dispute this, but I will remain sceptical.

Anyway, we know such things happen, happen in most offices, factories, even school staff rooms ("Lolita, come to my study for detention after school"), so Westminister is no exception. In fact, with its funny working hours far from home and myriad rooms with locks, the opportunities are considerable. Gothic may even be a turn-on for some sensitive souls. That Edwina Currie, who later shopped John Major over their very unwise (from his standpoint) affair, I wouldn't put much past her in the Gothic department.

When I first covered national politics I worked on the assumption that Tory MPs, then more public school than today, were more likely to get into trouble over sex, straight or gay. When I was a teenager, John Profumo, minister for war in the Macmillan team, got into trouble over Christine Keeler and lying to the House about it. 

A few years earlier Ian Harvey, another Tory, had been caught in St James's Park with a guardsman, though whispering allegations against Tam Galbraith, a junior minister, during the Vassal spy affair proved false. Two reporters went to jail for refusing to divulge sources which some said they didn't actually have.

I was an innocent schoolboy in Cornwall at the time and recall asking my seafaring father why Mr Profumo would so foolishly risk all for Ms Keeler. "My boy, a standing cock has no conscience," was his reply, a brisk explanation which was also wise. Thirty years later, when Cecil Parkinson was caught out over his affair with his secretary, Sarah Keays, I remember feeling as innocent as I did in 1963. Cecil was really caught between three tough women – Ms Keays, Mrs P and Margaret Thatcher, who had briefly hoped the gallant and handsome Cecil might become her successor.

In the old days, few such affairs came to light. That was how the upper classes conducted themselves and the press protected them, as Beaverbrook famously did in Mrs Simpson's divorce. As audiences of Howard Brenton's Never So Good were reminded last year, Harold Macmillan was cuckolded for 30 years by his Tory colleague, Bob Boothby. His revenge was to pack him off to the Lords where he rotted politically. Few knew.

Nowadays politicians and footballers – though few bankers, until recently – are fair game. "Paddy Pantsdown" remains a classic Sun headline, though the then Lib Dem leader had the wit to own up quickly like an adult. That is the difference between the brazen pros – Alan Clark and Steve Norris, for example, who never pretended to virtue – and the amateurs who lied or bluffed or hid their heads beneath their coats as the snappers snapped, the Mellors or Tim Yeos.

Actually doing it in the Commons, well, that's another story. In the latest case, Nigel Griffiths MP, there appear to be photos that may – may – suggest some element of entrapment in collusion with a tabloid. It's a wicked world out there. I dimly recall ringing an MP, long dead, who later hinted that his failure to take my call was something to do with giving his secretary dictation.

The arrival of many more women MPs – well over 100, as opposed to 20-ish – has changed the laddish ways of old. Women have more status. They are better protected and usually have more sense. So the pattern of MPs marrying as well as taking advantage of their secretary – upwardly mobile Tories such as John Biffen and Nigel Lawson both married theirs – has changed. I know a couple of Labour MPs who co-habit, actually, two couples. Does the world know? I think so. Does it matter? Less than it did.

My Westminster fave remains the well-documented case of Lady Falkender's two children, born at a time when she was Harold Wilson's all-powerful political secretary. It was not widely known in that innocent era. But one of the tabloids got as sniff of it and asked its veteran political editor, Walter Terry, to crack the case. Walter, whom I knew slightly, had to report failure. Odd really, but understandable because they turned out to be Walter's kids. It's all in Joe Haines's lively memoirs of the period.
