The employment minister, Tony McNulty, has got into trouble with the tabloids this weekend, an ex-minister, Nigel Griffiths, too. It shows how wise I was to have abandoned a sweeping generalisation that I used to trot out about scandals involving British politicians.

In used to be safe to say that Tories got into trouble over sex and Labour MPs over money. In both instances it was because they hadn't got enough of the one or the other when they were younger.

Nowadays MPs are less divided by class-based experiences such as public school and poverty, with the result that the scandals have become blurred.

So this weekend's two-for-one from the Mail on Sunday (McNulty) and the News of the World (Griffiths) are about cash and sex – McNulty's additional costs allowance, and Griffiths' curious alleged dalliance with a brunette and a camera inside the House of Commons and at an unspecified flat.

It was McNulty's trip down an all-too-familiar path that stayed near the top of the bulletins. Quite right, too, since it's public money at stake. Married Griffiths may have made a bit of a chump of himself, but that's hardly news.

I note in passing that someone – I know not who – has sold the compromising photos of the MP and his – unnamed – brunette to the News of the Screws, initially prompting the MP to deny it. As with randy footballers in hotels on Saturday night this may – may – have been a set-up, what we'd call entrapment if we liked politicians better.

As with MPs' expenses, the incident allows people who enjoy sounding high and mighty to sound high and mighty. Today's Mail quotes a "constituency" source – Griffiths represents a marginal seat – on the unwisdom of breaching the MPs' code of conduct and lying to the NoW, as if telling the truth about sex to that paper was a public duty.

Is it our business? Not really, which is why the Guardian and most papers I read at breakfast time ignored it today, but now that Griffiths has himself admitted his behaviour had "fallen below acceptable standards", this has been reported on guardian.co.uk.

Once a story is in the public domain – even in pre-internet days – my personal view has always been that readers/constituents should be given a 50-word account of the allegations as a news-in-brief, as a courtesy, albeit not a matter worth much of most people's attention.

Interestingly enough, some papers, the Times for instance, take the same view over McNulty's second home, which you can also read about on guardian.co.uk. The Times gives the story less than 100 words; at the same time it prints half-page cartoon showing him and Jacqui Smith helping themselves to cash.

Editorial pluralism at its grandest, but they both can't be right.

We've been over this ground here many times before, most recently with Smith's room in her sister's house in Peckham, listed as her main residence. If I understand the theology correctly, McNulty regards the Harrow constituency house (he owns it) in which his parents now live – nine miles from his own home in Hammersmith and 11 miles from the Commons – as his second home, and constituency base. He uses it to work in and – neighbours dispute this – sometimes stays there.

McNulty says he's acting within the rules and I'm sure he's right. He's also not maxed up his options to the financial hilt. But, as with so many of these cases, if these are the rules, the rules need fixing. It doesn't feel right – because it isn't right.

That feeling undermines public confidence in politicians, which is already in short supply. McNulty is paid £104,000 from the public purse. By chance his wife is paid twice as much as head of Ofsted. That's quite enough, isn't it?

The BBC's Ben Wright reports this morning that the committee on standards in public life, now chaired by Sir Chris Kelly, the former permanent secretary at the Department of Health, is considering taking a wide look at the whole issue of MPs exes.

Good. As I never tire of saying, most MPs know how to behave even if they don't always do so – much like the rest of us.

Don Touhig, the Welsh ex-minister who rides in-house shotgun on these issues, put it well enough when he said on Radio 4's Today programme this morning that expenses should be within the rules, not damage parliament's reputation and be actions an MP is "comfortable" with if they become public under FoI applications.

Even allowing for a good dollop of media prurience and hypocrisy, cases like this don't pass the Touhig test. It is getting ever harder for MPs to resist calls for external regulation.
