Different things trouble different people. I'm more worried by the recession and by global warming than by street crime, about which I can take sensible micro-precautions if I feel like it.

But a growing mood of public sentimentality, mixed as it is with public cynicism, scares me more than any of them because it's harder to shut the door against and potentially more destructive of the tone of public life.

A bit like the contemporary triumph of money over reputation as a prized goal, once it's gone it is hard to recover.

Poor Natasha Richardson died during the night. What a truly dreadful thing to happen, the result of what looked like a minor head injury anyone might have suffered on or off the ski slope.

Perhaps that's why they led this morning's news bulletins on her death, even on Radio 4. Fairly well-known actress from a famous dynasty, married to a film star, tragic accident etc etc. The papers duly print photos of grief-stricken family members at the hospital, photos which strike me as intrusive, heartless even. The whole packaged affair is, well, ghoulish.

I know, it happens all the time. Jade Goody seems to be taking part in her own death for the benefit of the media. We're told it's a good thing, bringing the unmentionable reality of modern death back into people's lives. If that is so, all well and good, but is it true?

A few weeks ago I raised an eyebrow on hearing that prime minister's question time had been cancelled because of the sudden death of the Camerons' son, Ivan, and was criticised for it – though few politicians with whom I have discussed the matter privately disagree. As for it bringing David Cameron and Gordon Brown closer together, I can't say I noticed it at yesterday's session.

What we're talking about here is the triumph of feelings over rationality, disproportionality over perspective, impulse over calculation, the let-it-all-hang-out values of sofa television over the nice-but-mundane realities of everyday life.

This week the Daily Mail, master manipulator of public sentimentality, has launched a campaign to help surviving veterans of the D-Day landings – there are apparently only 500 still alive, which seems very few – return to Normandy for the 65th anniversary celebrations on 6 June.

Dignified veterans are quoted about the "disgrace" of the government's failure to join the French, American, Canadian and even German governments in marking the occasion. So are some of the usual rent-a-mouth crowd. Apparently the wicked French are right about this one: Sarko, the incorrigible showman, will be there.

But, hang on. Didn't we celebrate the 60th anniversary recently? Five years ago, very likely. And didn't Ronald Reagan, Mrs T and the Queen all turn up in 1984 for the 40th? Was there something similar for the 50th in 1994? I'm sure there was, but one gets confused.

We are anniversary-minded these days, partly because it makes for good TV. It's always interesting which great events from the past get picked up for commemoration and which get ignored, a pretty capricious selection that tells us a lot about what we value and what we want to forget. But it also helps to have grainy archive film. No footage, no fanfare.

The vast scale of organisation needed to send those soldiers across those bullet-raked Normandy beaches in their individual acts of heroism is humbling. I remember writing in 1984 that it was the organising power of the state, not the Coca-Cola Company or McKinsey, that did the job. It is topical point no less valid today than in the heyday of Thatcher-Reagan triumphalism.

The D-Day invasion was a great achievement, a blow for human liberation from tyranny though – one has to say this again – most of the fearsome task was already being undertaken by the Red Army, whose successors in Moscow exploit that victory for their own domestic purposes.

So why make a big thing about the 65th anniversary? I don't really know. But I suspect it has a good deal to do with a sentimental and selective vision of the past that no one needs reminding about (even the kids have seen Saving Private Ryan) but will make great pictures.

A bit like the poor Richardson family.
