In a church hall three miles west of Leeds's still shiny city centre the credit crunch is at work, less visible but no less deadly than it is downtown in the cancelled commercial buildings and threatened layoffs of financial services workers.

Most banks pulled out of the poorer districts of Leeds in the 1990s recession, leaving many residents vulnerable to extortionate interest rates from loan firms. "At least £18m a year goes out of this community to pay debt, a lot of it to illegal lenders," says the MP John Battle.

The good news from Leeds for Gordon Brown is that Labour pessimists who predict widespread abstentions at the next election, or defections, seem to be outnumbered by cautious optimists. 

"Our people are reluctant to vote for the Tories - if they win, it will not be because they think David Cameron is the right person," said Arthur Giles, a veteran party worker whose verdict on "hard-working Brown" was based on canvassing along the terraces of Pudsey. 

Pudsey is the kind of seat the Tories need to capture. Tory-held for 75 years before it fell to Labour's Paul Truswell in 1997, it would take the kind of 6.3% swing that Cameron needs nationwide to win power. Giles thinks Truswell will hang on. His optimism is not unique. Voters interviewed by the Guardian in the city centre were aware the crisis was global. "We can't just point the finger at Gordon alone," said one. 

Even those who do blame Brown lack confidence in alternatives, suggesting he could yet save his premiership with exceptional luck and judgment. 

But the risks are obvious. "Personally, I think the government should stop trying so hard. It's under a lot of pressure, but that leads to scattergun initiatives instead of waiting to see what works," said Alison Lowe, a Labour councillor.

The gloomier news for Labour is that this financial services-dominated city - with 6,000 local jobs with HBOS alone - hopes the recession will end quickly but fears it may be about to get much worse. "The biggest problem in Yorkshire is confidence," said Bill Adams, regional secretary of the TUC. Firms, he said, were now "producing business plans for 1 April on the edge of a precipice".

Leeds is Labour territory: seven of its eight MPs are Labour, and it is the largest party on the council, with 43 seats. But it lost overall control in 2004 to a coalition of 24 Lib Dems and 22 Tories. There were unpopular 6.2% rent rises, compared with the 2.9% council tax rise. 

Holding one of 99 council seats is the BNP, which is getting better at campaigning, according to Labour activists, with a "TB vaccines rationed by NHS" campaign here, an attack on "animal cruelty" there - all digs at migrants. 

In Elmet, Colin Burgon's seat on the eastern fringe of Leeds, there are fears that Labour-to-BNP defections in former pit villages will help a Tory win. Labour cannot duck its record after 12 years in government. So, on both sides of the Pennines, a swath of seats, from Pudsey to Halifax (with its 7,000 HBOS jobs) and towards Calder Valley into Pendle and Colne Valley, could be vulnerable. 

Not so John Battle's seat of Leeds West. Many of its working-class residents, employed in construction, in retail or insurance, are used to insecurity. In St Margaret's church hall on Friday, at the annual meeting of a debt forum, the spectre of renewed recession was evident. Chaired by the vicar, Kathryn Fitzsimons, this was not a Labour event. But there was evidence of Labour- funded initiatives, such as the poster advising "Don't get in with a loan shark ... It will cost you an arm and a leg". Battle is passionate to see Brown repeat what the Labour council did here in the 80s when it hired jobless people to act as carers. "I say the poor can get us out of recession." 

James Lewis, an agent in a council byelection that Labour is defending, likens his party's support to an onion. Some supporters peeled away soon after 1997. Disquiet with Tony Blair peeled off more layers, though some returned. Those remaining were hardcore. 

Danny Adilypour, Labour's byelection candidate, a half-Iranian Methodist, rattled off what Labour had done and must do. He claimed Brown was less divisive than Blair. "If you support Labour you support Gordon Brown."
