So Sir Paul Judge and other high-minded citizens are keen to see a new party, untainted by past failure, break into Westminster politics and shake things up a bit. Admirable, but may I draw attention to the party most likely to do so at present. It isn't theirs, and they may not like it.

I had an email from Judge the other day, inviting me for a coffee or drink so that he could explain why I was wrong to dismiss the prospect of success for his new political project, the Jury Team. It is planning to field candidates across the country in the European elections on 4 June, though not to fight local elections – which are confined to England this year and relatively few in number. But watch out next year, Gordon Brown! The Jury Team is coming!

It was a friendly email, but I rebuffed it. Why? As I explained, the former chief executive of the Conservative party during the Major era is unlikely to change my mind. And I am certainly unlikely to change his because he's obviously thought about the need for a new political force of independent, patriotic people who will put the national interest before selfish, partisan concerns.

Let's meet after those 4 June elections so we can discuss the first public evidence that either he's right or I'm right, I suggested. Gent that he seems to be, Judge agreed, though I read in the Guardian Diary that he omitted to notify Peter Luff, the Tory MP for Worcester, of his plans, despite being president of Luff's local Tory association. Not very New Politics, I'd say.

Never mind. Sir Paul has received some encouragement from the columnar classes – folk like Andreas Whittam Smith – the chief founder of the Independent. Parliament is not working properly ( I agree) and is "incapable of reforming itself" asserts AWS. The old vested interests must be swept away.

How can this be done? Via the instant communication joys of digital technology, explain Sir Paul and Sir Andreas. Using its website they are setting up a "nationally coordinated process to select candidates using mobile phone technology." (Duh?) "Countless talented people" are willing to put themselves up if they thought they might win. "One mobile, one vote" declares ex-MP Martin Bell, whose successful stand as an independent against Neil Hamilton in Tatton was one of the highlights of the 1997 campaign.

Bell, a distinguished former BBC correspondent whom I have known for many years, is another good chap. I do not mind that he called me a "Jurassic defender of the status quo" on Cif the other day. He misunderstands my critique of the Jury Team project, but never mind.

My complaint is not that many of the Judge-and-Jury Team's criticisms are invalid. Far from it: many are very familiar and truer than I would wish. It's the prognosis, not the diagnosis, that troubles me. If, for example, reform of party funding was easy – as Sir Paul seems to think – it would have been achieved by now. All party leaders hate the pain and embarrassment it routinely causes.

Yesterday a smart 250-page paperback landed on my desk and only served to deepen my gloom. Modestly entitled The End of the Party, it set out what's wrong with British politics – from alienation to falling turnout and funding problems. It is thus not encouraging to see my old friend, Peter Oborne of the Daily Mail, getting five indexed references. Peter has the quaint notion that we are witnessing what one of his books calls "The Triumph of the Political Class", whereas we are actually seeing it run ragged by the media and a disengaged (not the same as alienated) electorate. In his haste ex-stockbroker Pete forgot to write a book about the triumph of the banking classes, the ones who got away with the loot. Never mind: the point serves to reinforce my suspicion that the Jury Team is a Grumpy Old Men party (mostly grumpy old Tory men, I suspect – though not you, Martin dear).

Peter's idea is dripping wet behind both ears. Well within living memory, the SDP tried to "break the mould" of two-party politics by enlisting decent, high-minded and disinterested people. If it couldn't crack the Thatcher-Michael Foot duopoly in the dire year that was 1983 we can all assume it's difficult. Plenty of others have tried, from Arthur Scargill and the charismatic Tommy Sheridan in Scotland on the left, to assorted "British Democrat" parties on the right. Plus Ukip and the BNP.

At least the SDP grasped that if you want to break moulds you have to embrace proportional representation for Westminster elections. The Jury Team fails to address it – to the astonishment of some Tory MPs to whom I've talked. Myself, I think that the capacity for effective decision-taking is more important than meticulous fairness in electing a government and that PR generally delivers weak government (witness Israel and Italy). But the fact is that Britain has let PR into some of its elections, all for tactical and sensible reasons like ensuring that rural Welsh people and Irish Catholics have a say in divided communities. The European elections are also PR elections, run on what is called a " closed party list" system that I – and many others – denounced at the time because it gives too much power to party machines, too little to voters.

Here's where I deliver on the promise at the start of this article. As everyone knows PR allows small parties like the Greens to get seats in Strasbourg, Cardiff Bay or Holyrood (being Green in Belfast means something else), along with the Lib Dems. But, as we saw in 2004, it also let in a chunk of Ukip MEPs. If Ukip, sullied by its experience of office, is fading as a party of protest, who will take its place among angry or frightened voters who want to stage a protest against the established parties? 

Not a bunch of well-scrubbed and high-minded middle class militants with a smattering of knighthoods, I suspect. No, politicians I talk to lower their voices and say it's the BNP that the system should be worrying about on 4 June, not Judge. "Will Nick Griffin [the BNP leader] really win a seat?" I ask. One seat? Tapping into understandable voter resentment in these frightening times, they could win four or five, comes the reply from more alarmed MPs.

With such success the BNP will get access to EU funds – perhaps £250,000 a year on some estimates – to spend on publicity and campaigning. When Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the French National Front, made a similar breakthrough, he made the run-off for president thanks to a feeble incumbent and self-indulgent splits on the left. The lefties ended up having to vote for Jacques Chirac and hated it.

Perhaps a BNP success would provide the shot in the arm that the mainstream political system needs to reform itself. Either way, it would make Judge's drawing room maneouvres look a bit marginal.
