Contrary to some headlines, the higher education lobby represented by Universities UK did not actually recommend a near-doubling of student tuition fees to £5,000 a year - or more - in its report yesterday. It merely set out various scenarios. They are there to assist the government's own promised review of the controversial new system, once the guinea pig class of 2006 graduates this summer.

Not unreasonably, most observers saw the report as a green light for a fees increase, noting that the UUK study called the £5,000 fee "effectively maintenance of the status quo" established in the Tony Blair-Charles Clarke legislation of 2005, which allies of the-then chancellor came close to derailing.

As such it will not create the kind of differential spread of fees originally envisaged, allowing students a financial trade-off between Oxbridge and Bog Standard University. That would take a £7,000 cap, the UUK consultants concluded. But it might also start to deter students from poorer backgrounds wanting to go to college, as documented in Canada and other countries. It has not happened here yet. The latest application figures show 464,167 people applying to go to college in Britain, an 8% rise, although that includes growing numbers of mature students and foreigners.

So the £5,000 figure smacks of a compromise which will annoy everyone. John Denham, the universities secretary, no less a gut egalitarian than the prime minister, has made a virtue of not expressing an opinion that might influence the independent review. Yesterday his higher education minister, David Lammy - another deprived child who cracked the system and met Barack Obama on the same journey through Harvard, went no further than to welcome another contribution to this "important debate". 

Lammy's caution failed to impress student leaders who will be organising a demo outside parliament today. Far from being expanded, the "disastrous" fee system should be abolished at a time of deepening recession, replaced with a fairer system based on individual needs, said the National Union of Students. 

The Daily Mail is already attacking another "middle class tax". David Blunkett sympathised with the students. So did the Liberal Democrat spokesman, Stephen Williams, while David Willetts, for the Tories, accused ministers of kicking a decision into the very long grass.

Willetts may be in Denham's chair by June 2010. Denham remains committed to expanding access to poorer students, to the top universities, too. So does Willetts, though he predicts that some qualified students will not find a place this year. If ministers hope to raise the fee cap without addressing the subsidised student loan system that goes with it they will run into public spending problems. Blair's 2005 compromise with Brown front-end loaded the costs, so that graduates don't start repaying until they have decent jobs. What jobs?
