Nothing like an attack on the price of booze to get the libertarians attacking the nanny staters and everyone having a good time feeling righteous. They've all been back on the barricades since Sunday when someone leaked the proposal from the chief medical officer, Sir Liam Donaldson, that the government should raise the price to 50p a unit in response to what he sees as a serious epidemic.

Not a bad fellow, Donaldson, an experienced Whitehall warrior who clashed with John Reid over the then health secretary's determination to avoid an outright ban on smoking in public places. Alan Milburn, on the other hand, once called him "the best official I have worked with".

But I was irritated to see Donaldson trying to popularise the notion of "passive drinking" because it doesn't quite work as "passive smoking" does and might discredit the useful idea that we can all inhale tobacco smoke that does us harm. No one ever got drunk from the fumes of their best friend's breath, did they? Not for want of trying on occasion.

Where the chief medical officer (CMO) is surely right – and the libertarians wrong – is to link drunkenness to issues wider than ruined hearts and livers – arguably your own business – to assault, domestic violence and other crimes or misconduct which make for much unhappiness to other people, often children.

"Try to imagine a world without it," he told reporters. The Guardian's Sarah Boseley gets the point and highlights it in today's paper. I'm not sure that Zoe Williams, speaking for a younger generation on the comment pages, quite does.

Odd that people who pride themselves on taking progressive positions on all sorts of issues recoil from what it is easy to denounce as "nanny state" behaviour. Yet those who commit rape and those who suffer rape – to take one glaringly obvious example – are sometimes drunk at the time.

I get into trouble for suggesting that women have a duty of care to themselves about dressing appropriately as well as drinking (so do young men, who risk being attacked or even murdered) and remain puzzled that I am saying anything other than the blindingly obvious. Leaving a window open doesn't make your home fair game for burglars, it does make it more vulnerable.

As so often though, it's not just a matter of identifying a problem, but what to do about it in the practical realm of politics and society. Drink is much cheaper than it used to be. When I was earning £15.70 a week (we used to say "14 shillings") in my first job we would buy a bottle of Nicolas red – half-decent plonk – for just under a pound, at least a tenner in today's funny money. Nowadays the stuff is better and cheaper in real terms. Chemical tweaking improves wines which might once have been undrinkable.

Cynical supermarket loss leaders – 60p a can of beer sometimes – compound the problem, not least because it encourages unsocial drinking of all kinds – furtive drinking in the park, solitary drinking at home etc. As plenty of people have been quick to point out this week, pub drinking is a social good that extends beyond mere drink: people talk to each other (if they want to). So the Beer and Pub Association has a point in arguing that Chancellor Darling – not a drink puritan – was wrong simply to ratchet up beer duty (9%) last budget and put an inflation-plus 2% escalator on top.

The experts agree that price does affect behaviour and consumption patterns: hence the popularity of supermarket cider, a drink I have been unable to touch since my first, very enthusiastic encounter with alcohol at a friend's party when we were 14. The smell still makes me queasy as nothing else does except the smell of hospital wards, which dates from an ­earlier trauma.

So put the price up, as Donaldson says? Yes, I think so. But steady on there. What constitutes a unit? Eight a bottle ("It depends what sort of wine it is," says a shiraz-bashing Labour MP I know) or 10, as I saw mentioned in today's paper? My own pioneering work on the world-recognised White Unit of Measurement says six. So did the Department of Health in its recommended 28 units a week (for men) phase, since reduced.

We can find a compromise on units. But there's also a question of smuggling. By coincidence, the Commons health select committee this week issued a report saying that ministers should be tougher on smoking, but also admitting that a third of tobacco in the UK is now smuggled in. Surprise surprise – poor people who can't afford expensive cigs and often have the worst health are most likely to buy bootleg. Smuggling drink is harder – it's bulkier – but where there's a will there's usually a way.

Booze, cigarettes and drugs can all do us a lot of harm and cost the taxpayer a lot of money via the NHS and other social costs, broken homes and the rest. That's no excuse to punish the sensible majority who drink responsibly, reply Gordon Brown and his ministers, no excuse to tinker with markets, add the Tories – as if supermarket loss-leaders are not a pretty basic market manipulation.

Frankly, I don't believe they believe that; they're just scared of the supermarket lobby, scared of voters who will accuse them of bullying, or of stealth taxes. As with the traffic light system of labelling fatty and salty food, they have prevaricated too long, always threatening to act – they are now – but never quite doing it. Socialising young people's drinking habits (not to mention those middle-aged women tippling alone at home, according to one recent scare story) would help, but that's harder.

Contrary to what we often read, we actually drink less a head than we used to, the equivalent of 120 bottles of wine a year – pretty feeble, I'd say. But excess is a problem, as it always has been.

Donaldson has started what Alex Salmond likes to call a "national conversation" on what to do about it. Come to think about it, the Scottish parliament is squaring up to curb off licence sales to under-21s and impose minimum pricing at 40p a unit. A political row is underway. One thing those of us south of the border can do is to sit back and see how it goes. Devolution can benefit us all.
