Not all MPs lower their voices when asked about the impact of immigration on political debate as the recession deepens and polls register growing voter resentment over foreigners threatening Gordon Brown's "British jobs for British workers". Another FT/Harris poll did so yesterday, with 54% of Britons polled resenting the legal right of EU citizens to work in Britain.

A few MPs cheerfully pander to the xenophobic market. A few bravely insist that globalisation and the free movement of labour has always benefited societies willing to take in both refugees and ambitious economic migrants. "Thank goodness it's not about race any more. I now have third generation Afro-Caribbeans complaining about the Poles," booms one confidently multicultural London MP.

Most say "it's complicated" and lower their voices. Migration has crept back up the list of hot-button issues since Labour opened the door to an unexpectedly large wave of eastern Europeans who joined the EU in 2004. Just 6% thought it a major issue in 1998, 42% last year, says Ipsos/Mori. MPs fear a BNP surge.

What will happen as unemployment passes the 2 million mark this week? Labour MPs are in a particular bind, torn between liberal instincts and awareness that for many of their white, working-class constituents this is not an abstract issue.

"How can my unskilled young constituents compete for jobs with bilingual, highly motivated Poles?" they ask each other. 

"The Poles do jobs they won't do," colleagues reply. 

There is always an anecdote to match both views. "They're certainly not taking your job; you never work," one minister recalls telling a local lager lout. It is not a remark he would make on TV.

Basic facts are disputed even when - as happened last month - it is the Office of National Statistics (ONS) issuing the facts. Phil Woolas, appointed immigration minister last autumn to be Mr Tough Guy on controls, accused the ONS of being "naive or sinister" for reporting that one in nine UK residents was born abroad, shortly after suggesting they had been taking half the new jobs.

Labour gets hammered from both directions for being too tough on needy asylum seekers, too soft on everyone else. "Tough rhetoric, soft in practice," says Damian Green, Woolas's Tory shadow. Where it is undeniably at fault is in making only half-hearted efforts since 1997 to promote the positive case for immigration. As one third of hospital doctors are foreign-born (as they were in 1948), the NHS would be an obvious place to start.

Labour's new points system, squeezing unskilled non-EU labour while letting in skilled "knowledge nomads" who can work anywhere, reflects its deeply defensive posture for 50 years. 

Today Woolas will face down critics at a Commons committee. On Thursday the more emollient Hazel Blears, the communities secretary, will unveil a migration impact levy on visas to help mitigate pressures on local services - schools and GPs - which ministers must be honest enough to admit. Tiptoeing around a sensitive issue only breeds resentment, says Blears.
