What I wanted to hear from Binyam Mohamed before he repeated allegations of British security service complicity in his ordeal with foreign torture squads was how the young Ethiopian had got himself into harm's way in the first place.

Today, Mohamed has been talking to the BBC. Last weekend, he spoke first to the Mail on Sunday via my old Guardian colleague, David Rose.

I know nothing about the reasoning behind this, but it's obviously a sophisticated media operation, shrewdly designed to maximise pressure for answers from the government.

The Mail's account, quickly picked up by other Sunday papers, as intended, addressed my question better than I had expected.

In 1992, Mohamed's father, an executive with Ethiopian Airlines, had fled the prospect of arrest following the overthrow of the unpleasant Mengistu regime. He left his wife behind.

These were obviously privileged people, at least at home. They lived in Washington DC – quite a lot of Ethiopians there – but, at 14, Binyam experienced what he called "racist bullying" at school.

Since he spoke good English, his father brought him to London and – at not quite 16 – left him here.

Go to social services, he said. So he did, ending up with a housing association flat. He was given leave to remain in Britain, and starting at sixth form college.

At this stage, you'd expect the Mail on Sunday to throw its collective pen down and ask why the British taxpayer was funding a well-to-do teenager with no UK link.

Good question, but the paper is more concerned at present with screwing the government over torture allegations – I can't say whether it would have done this to a Thatcher government – so it let that pass.

Anyway, Mohamed says he stayed out of trouble in Notting Hill – actually its poorer North Kensington neighbour, I suspect – until he fell in with a druggie crowd and rapidly got into a mess.

Read Malcolm X and understand your neglected religion, a man at the mosque told him.

The last time I read that advice was in Dreams from my Father, Barack Obama's first memoir: Malcolm made sense of his adolescent racial pain in ways that other black writers didn't, he wrote.

Obviously the much less privileged but much smarter Obama didn't attempt to go to inspect "pure" Islam as practised by the Taliban, as Mohamed was advised to do – and did.

Instead, he buckled down. Those are life choices people make, well or badly.

As an Ethiopian asylum seeker, Mohamed couldn't get a UK passport (glad to hear that bit) so he borrowed a friend's and inserted his own photo. I know, I know, a daft, adolescent thing to do.

Ignorant of the Taliban (he rates his knowledge of them as "minus one"), but keen to give non-violent support to the Chechen resistance to Russia, he ended up going on a 45-day bootcamp course in Afghanistan.

"I would never have taken up arms against British or American soldiers ... "

In the chaos after 9/11, when the US started bombing, we find our wanderer in Kabul, suffering from malaria.

He gets into Pakistan, tries to fly back to London on his dodgy documents in 2002 and – at the second attempt – gets arrested.

The nightmare of rendition, torture cells, interrogation and detention at Guantánamo Bay begins.

It all sounds ridiculous but, to my mind, ridiculous enough to be plausible.

As noted here before, crucial to the politics of Mohamed's campaign now is that M15 provided data to the Americans about him that led to him being sent to Morocco.

Thus he said to the BBC today: "If it wasn't for the British involvement right at the beginning of the interrogations in Pakistan, and suggestions that were made by MI5 to the Americans of how to get me to respond, I don't think I would have gone to Morocco."

"It was that initial help that MI5 gave to America that led me through the seven years of what I went through."

On his own account, he tried to talk himself out of trouble by telling the Americans about a spoof nuclear device-building website. Interrogators got excited, as they often seem to in their boring and nasty work.

It's all bad stuff which raises questions about the world we live in, one in which privileged citizens of one state feel free to offload their children on to another state's less privileged taxpayers.

I happened to know someone abandoned by his father in London at 16 – his father called home by a despotic regime, never to see his son again, the son left with enough to get by if he was prudent.

It's horrible. My friend made a proper life, but you pay a price.

So we can sympathise with Mohamed's plight as an abandoned teenager while regretting his youthful folly.

Whether his experiences make his allegations against M15 credible is currently a matter for the attorney general, Lady Scotland.

They sound plausible, though they involve several leaps of evidence that remain to be tested.

It's inconvenient, I know, but evidence is the best way to make these kind of judgments. We shall see.
