Fantasists who occasionally suggest that Gordon Brown may launch a May general election off the back of the G20 summit in London on 2 April are wrong for at least two reasons.

One is that voters worried about tangible things such as jobs and mortgages are rarely impressed by opaque summit communiques. The other is that those who do follow G20 rituals are already warning not to expect too much.

Everyone knows what the summit must not do: stop talking, give up and adopt unilateralist policies that end up impoverishing us all. That is what the 66-nation London summit did in 1933, four years after the Wall Street crash. It led to 10 years of protectionism, depression, war and death. In 2008-09 the EU, G8, G20 have been summiting away like mad.

Unlike 1933, when new US president Franklin D Roosevelt sent encouraging noises, stayed away and decided the US could go it alone (wrong then, as now), Barack Obama will be in London. He enjoys more political charisma and global goodwill than any president since FDR, except, perhaps, Jack Kennedy.

Obama's mere presence is not enough to ensure success for Brown's campaign for co-ordinated responses by the 20 states that produce 90% of world GDP; nor will the "put people first" demos that are promised. His cabinet secretary, Sir Gus O'Donnell, highlights one problem: key members of Obama's economics team are still not confirmed by Congress. "There is nobody there," the Treasury veteran admitted in a rare gaffe.

That is the least of it. Above all, the summit needs to address what was let slip in 1933, stabilisation of the world financial order to make credit flow again, and restoring economic demand through government interventions. The rest is optional.

The stats are truly scary: GDP is shrinking at an annualised rate of 20.8% in South Korea, 12.7% in Japan, 8.2% in Germany, 5.9% in the UK and 3.8% in the US. China's and India's growth rates are faltering.

But differing priorities are unresolved. Even David Miliband's admirable concern to use the crisis to protect emerging economies, promote low-carbon investment and temper oil-rich autocracies sounds different from No 10's hard-nosed agenda.

Yet Brown alarms the CBI by focusing on tax havens and hedge fund regulation, plus global banking rules, which Washington is unlikely to accept, whatever Obama says. The busted banks were all heavily regulated; it was regulation that failed, critics murmur.

The eurozone is signalling more concern to protect the single currency, already under huge strain, than to pile up yet more debt to refloat beached economies. Obama may boast more of a European social democratic heart than any previous president, but his head is firmly America First.

As at the G20 Washington in November, the most likely outcome will be short on specifics. Better to keep talking than not, but hardly an election platform.
