There are days, aren't there, when you've just seen something grim on TV or in print and have to take a deep breath before forcing yourself to try to see it from the other party's point of view.

Gerry Adams, those militant Islamist demonstrators in Luton, the Myerson family ... It's been one of those weeks.

A handy guide to what not to think is often provided by the Daily Mail, which is usually (not always, as we'll see below*) keen to rush to judgment on its readers' behalf. Thus yesterday's headline, "The Weasel Words of Gerry Adams", arising from the Sinn Féin president's Radio 4 interview in the wake of Sunday's breakaway IRA murders.

"Last night's attack was an attack on the peace process. It was wrong and counterproductive," said Adams. And: "You may take some succour from the fact that whoever was involved have no support, no strategy and no popular will to back up their actions."

As usual, there was a slightly chilly tone to his remarks. "Counterproductive", "no strategy", "no popular will" – he was really calling his old comrades thick, wasn't he? But he was careful to restrain his condemnation.

Weasel-ish? I thought so too. But that's not the point. As usual Martin McGuinness was much more effective: more direct, warmer, more human even, when he popped up on TV yesterday to condemn the killings – three by this stage.

Yes, I know that the deputy first minister has serious form in this department. Belfast legend has it that when the Provos clinched the ceasefire back in 1994, he paid a private visit to the rival INLA faction telling the chaps not even to think about disrupting the process.

If I were a Continuity or Real IRA foot soldier, involved in this week's cowardly futility, I'd be worried about annoying Martin, whose air of cheerful menace is so much more convincing than Gerry's bookish manner.

But what do I know? Only this: that Adams may not be a natural on TV (the Brits kept him off it for years under Mrs T so he may lack practice), but he has a delicate balancing act to sustain in what we routinely call the republican community. Most of us want him to succeed, don't we? A little hypocrisy about violence is a small price to pay.

As for those bearded Islamist heavies and their burka-clad womenfolk who waved "Butchers of Basra" placards at the 200 soldiers of the 2nd Battalion Royal Anglian Regiment who marched through Luton on their return from Iraq – well, the Mail was on their case too.

"A hate-filled mob," the paper called them. The Sun, another good hater, has swept Jade Goody off page one to denounce "Hate for Heroes". You had to read the Guardian's account to learn that the vocal protesters may have numbered no more than a dozen.

Onlookers turned on them shouting "scum" and "No surrender to the Taliban" (No surrender? What would Gerry Adams make of that?). Gordon Brown expressed his "disappointment," while Shahid Malik, the junior justice minister, joined condemnation of the Islamists' "sickening" antics. Margaret Moran (Lab, Luton South) expressed "astonishment" that the police allowed the demo. So both points of view were heard.

It took Abdul Malik, a mainstream Muslim spokesman from Luton, to point out that the free speech we value and defend includes the free speech of people whose views we may dislike and are almost certainly opponents of free speech. Good for him. The Islamists may be repressed and repressive, deluded, or just wholesome anti-war campaigners. But it's a free country.

Which brings me to the Myersons. Do you read this stuff? It's been running for a week now; ever since news emerged of the spat between north London journalist Julie Myerson and her son, Jake, about whose teenage drug problems she has written a thinly-disguised book that needs no additional publicity from me.

I've done my best. I ignored Julie and Jake slugging it out in various papers for days, then loyally tried to read Jonathan (he's the dad) Myerson's account in yesterday's G2. Didn't need to finish; got the point. Argh!

Today's Times contains a censorious interview with the couple, Julie and Jono (it's what she calls him. Remember, this is a free speech column).

In it they prove sufficiently lacking in self-awareness to pose in clothes which suggest they are not Jake's parents, but his siblings. None of my business, but this may be the source of the problem.

Anyway, most people have experience of teenagers, either being them or raising them, the druggie phase that some try and most get through in one piece – as Jake probably will; he's clearly got a lot going for him, that boy, despite the pushy parents. We can sympathise with the Myersons, but only in small doses. Sorry, Jools and Jono, dragging the kids through the media circus won't help, even if there is a book to sell.

* The Mail has opened up a second front with the Myersons. Using its well-honed investigative technique it has discovered that Julie has also fallen out with her sister. The paper has been busy promoting the feud.

Perhaps such sagas are supposed to make the rest of us feel better, or at least not as bad as those Myersons. In a leader column today the paper has also found room to condemn Max Mosley's "disgusting and depraved behaviour" in S&M sessions because the formula one chief dared to meet MPs and discuss his treatment by the News of the World, which he successfully sued for its "Nazi" libel.

As the Guardian reports today, Mosley was an impressive witness, given to masterly understatement (Dad had "overdone it a bit" in his Hitlerite activities), but the Mail is concerned only with his previously private sex life.

Odd then that its condemnation does not address the MPs' star witness yesterday, Gerry McCann, father of Madeleine, who also successfully sued in Fleet Street for libels against himself and his wife. Pretty damning stuff, as you'd expect, reiterating fellow arguido Robert Murat's testimony at a Cambridge Union debate last week.

I took part in that debate and half-expected Murat to be some kind of oddball. Not a bit of it: as normal as you and me. Make that more normal.
