David Cameron made a gentle return to work yesterday after his family bereavement, re-entry into the rough and tumble of politics made easier by the bipartisan mood over the murders in Northern Ireland. As a result, Tory handlers dropped all thoughts of him talking about Ivan Cameron's death when he gave interviews yesterday. The victims of the gunmen are someone's children too.

The sombre mood from Belfast will probably see Cameron through today's prime minister's questions, but normal party hostilities will resume urgently enough. At 42:30:19%, yesterday's Times/Populus poll confirmed the Tories' lead over Labour and the Liberal Democrats, with the Tories safely above 40%, as all polls have been in 2009. It would give Cameron a clear Commons majority, 40-plus MPs, even more than he has appointed to his big-tent shadow cabinet (a startling 32).

Though such percentages dispel dreams of a hung parliament, Nick Clegg's troops remain more cheerful than Labour MPs.

Why? Because they still enjoy the novelty of running so many councils, and cross fingers that lack of enthusiasm for Cameron ("his support is wide, but shallow," says one MP) may allow them to save their seats from the Tories, provided they step up their anti-Labour rhetoric. Vince Cable, not Nick Clegg, is their star.

Cameron thus edges towards power leading a party that may grumble (its websites certainly do), but is, says one MP, "united, sane and ahead" as it wasn't for a decade. Can Labour pull it back? Can Cameron blow it? Fewer and fewer MPs outside government think so, short of some barely imaginable horror - economic or terrorist - that rescues Gordon Brown or (highly unlikely) creates a national government.

Yet Cameron has issues still unresolved. 

George Osborne, still curfewed after last summer's Corfu caper, made a solid economic speech in Birmingham on Friday, skating over past Conservative errors (they didn't see the crash coming either). 

The ConservativeHome website, a thorn in the leadership's flesh, is already demanding spending cuts which hurt Tories too: Trident II, for example, and even Osborne's pledge to abolish inheritance tax for rich people.

"People don't have a clear narrative yet, one called The Tory Road to Recovery," admits a Conservative MP. It is actually worse than that. 

An FT survey this week reminded its Tory readers that 32 shadow ministers have made a lot of costly pledges - scrapping stamp duty for first-time buyers, cutting corporation tax from 28p to 25p, a high speed train to Manchester.

All have to be paid for, on top of the burgeoning cost of the recession. 

Cameron and Osborne promise to hack back Labour's spending plans with one hand, but promise to protect not just health and education, but defence (tough Dave) and international development (soft Dave) as well. 

They have undergone little serious scrutiny so far. That must change. 

"Let's hope Brown hangs on to 3 June 2010," say Tory MPs. With luck the worst will be over by then.
