In the course of a busy day reacting to the Italian earthquake and other global poverty problems, Save the Children found time yesterday to announce a new partnership with Family Action to make small grants, up to £200, to families struggling to make ends meet here in Britain.

Charities themselves are struggling in the recession. A survey from the Charity Commission last month confirmed that 52% of UK charities now admit to being hit by the economic downturn, half that number significantly so, notably by income lost both from donations and investments. And all at a time when demand for their services is going up.

On some guesstimates income is 13% down. Charities moved quickly, quicker than governments would, to cut costs, recruit volunteers and share services. But the crisis is "widening and deepening", says the commission's chairman, Dame Suzi Leather, whom small-c conservative charities suspect of having an overly political view of her role.

Barely a generation ago many Labour politicians took a sniffy view of voluntary organisations, imagining the state would relieve the need for "charity", much loathed by the poor in the Lady Bountiful era. Nowadays the Cabinet Office, in the heart of Whitehall, is home to the Office of the Third Sector, with its own activist minister, Kevin Brennan.

Even before the recession, charities great and small, third-sector bodies and social enterprise were part of the New Labour vision - now more so as the kind of bodies that can reach the most needy.

Little wonder then that ministers found £40m last month to keep the charity world afloat (not a tenth of what may be needed) by raiding budgets across Whitehall: a joined-up bailout. Nor that the cross-party Treasury select committee has recommended to the cash-strapped Alistair Darling that he compensate charities that lost money with Icelandic banks.

How much? No one knows for certain and smaller charities are not obliged to say, unless losses threaten their survival. The figure is between £80m and £120m on some estimates. But Naomi House, the children's hospice, lost £6m, Cats Protection even more.

Ministers stepped in to protect UK private savers when the Icelandic banking system collapsed last autumn. But why stop here? Two groups are left squealing. Local authorities may have lost up to £1bn deposited with high-yield Icelandic banks. Whitehall takes the view, endorsed by the Treasury select committee, that they were negligent and thus open to the doctrine of "moral hazard" that states that bailing out careless risktakers when their risk goes bad encourages them to behave recklessly again. Mervyn King's reluctance to bail out the banks in the early stages of the recession in 2007 stemmed from that perception - but was swept away by necessity.

There is also anger and distress among savers in Guernsey and the Isle of Man, mostly pensioners, who also lost heavily. But they took advantage of offshore tax rates and other benefits that have now become disbenefits. To govern is to choose. In choosing to help UK charities ministers have picked the more deserving priority.
