The violence which shook the devolution settlement in Northern Ireland at the weekend has no parallel in Scotland, where devolved political battles are fought with words, albeit harsh ones. 

Since Iain Gray, Labour's new leader at Holyrood, announced his opposition to SNP demands for an independence referendum abuse has intensified. The row bumped Gordon Brown's address to the US Congress off Scottish front pages, as do the latest twists in the financial crisis in which major Edinburgh banks - RBS and HBOS - have unhappy roles. The crisis was Gray's justification for swinging Labour's 46 votes against a referendum in last week's 72-47 test vote.

A year ago Labour's then-leader, Wendy Alexander, said: "Bring it on." Downing Street was unenthusiastic and Alexander later fell, but the SNP leader Alex Salmond also said "not yet", preferring his "national conversation" to educate voters about independence. Labour now says he missed his chance.

And the Lib Dems also switched. With Labour and the Tories they can block any bill first minister Salmond still wants to push through in early 2010 - before elections in Westminster.

SNP strategists talk as if a referendum Yes vote in late 2010 is still likely and that all the barriers to dis-union, from oil and debt to defence and EU membership, can easily be resolved between two "mature democracies". And if the SNP's bill is blocked by the three "Westminster parties" they can fight the Holyrood elections in 2011 as Scotland's voice.

Meanwhile the Calman commission is reviewing 10 years of devolution to see if Holyrood's powers should be expanded. If it says yes, the PM "will support them", he told Labour's Scottish conference in Dundee on Friday. Yet Brown also argued that Scotland could not have coped with its collapsed banks alone, a claim the SNP dismisses: all countries, big and small, have banking problems, several smaller ones have reacted faster and better than did London. "I don't believe the recession is an argument against independence. I think it supports it," said Mike Russell, Salmond's canny constitution minister.

In Dundee Gray and the Scottish secretary, Jim Murphy, piled into Salmond's failures over nearly two years: keen on taking credit, not blame, "always in the picture, never in the frame," Gray said. 

Salmond's minority administration has had to retreat, most recently on its pledge to replace council tax. Labour points to Murphy's £1bn offer towards the new Forth Bridge as proof he can broker deals for Scotland: "It's not the end for Salmond but the end of the beginning." 

The SNP remains buoyant, happy to blame Brown for HBOS's disastrous shotgun marriage with Lloyds and recall that it was a Labour minister, Ron Davies, who called devolution "a process, not an event". Why, as an independent member of the EU, Scotland might even be a net contributor, they say.
