I'm afraid what follows is a spot of bullying, involving a chap who should know better called Sir Paul Judge. He's the "multimillionaire businessman" (surely that's no longer a description to inspire confidence?) reported by the Sunday Times to be launching a party (www.juryteam.org) – to "clean up politics". It starts next Monday.

Oh no, not again. The Sunday Times has a weakness for new parties bent on cleaning up politics. It reported one being set up a couple of years back, though the paper's report turned out to be the high point of the party's career.

"The Jury Team is an umbrella organisation to encourage and facilitate the selection and election of independent candidates for initially the European parliamentary elections in June, and then at the next general election. An entirely non-partisan group, they welcome candidates to run on any policy platform. Its candidates will, however, have to be pledged to support policies which lead to better governance of parliament and not to support any policies based on discrimination," says a statement circulated this morning.

It's not that politics doesn't need improvement or that Sir Paul's "Jury Team" – geddit? Judge and jury – doesn't have perfectly sensible ideas among its 12 "governance proposals".

But Judge doesn't seem to have spotted why, for instance, the Hayden Phillips report on party funding has not been implemented. Why not? Because it seeks to reconcile legitimate conflicting interests – the source and size of donations and spending – in ways the two main parties find unacceptable.

That's what politics is about, Paul: reconciling interests in a peaceful and acceptable way without resort to shooting pizza delivery staff outside an army barracks. It's not that existing parties don't try to reconcile conflicting interests, it's more that it's difficult and – as in Northern Ireland – hard work.

But Judge wants to find men and women of goodwill, all of them committed to "integrity and a lack of vested interests" – quite a tall order – who will fight the good fight against the "oligarchical" and "arrogant" incumbents.

He wants the Nolan principles of clean government entrenched (aren't they already?), backbench freedom from the whips, fixed five-year parliaments with a maximum of three terms each (bye, bye, Gordon), trigger referendums, stakeholder comanagement of departments, no more British goldplating of EU directives. There is lots of scope for reform – and chaos – in some of these ideas.

The real question is: why start a party, why announce you are hoping to field a full set of 72 "independent" candidates for the European elections on 4 June (next year's general election too) when you must know you're almost certain to get nowhere, thereby disillusioning any volunteers you attract in the process?

I know this sounds like bullying and I'm sorry. But Judge used to be a senior official of the Tory party under John Major, so I recall, and ought to know that running political parties is hard work.

You don't start from scratch unless you've got a better reason than he has because it will only deepen the malaise you claim to diagnose.

Let's run through this quickly. British politics started the 20th century with two and a bit parties – Con, Lib and infant Labour – plus the Irish Nationalist party, which duly went its own way. It ended the century with two and a slightly larger bit – Con, Lab and a surprisingly tenacious Liberal party, now called the Liberal Democrats to reflect its merger with the SDP, which broke away from Labour in the 80s – but failed to "break the mould".

Yes, I know that nationalist parties have grown from slow beginnings in the Celtic regions to positions of power today as the British imperial state has receded. But small parties of left and right – from the SWP and the Communist party to Oswald Mosley's New party, the NF and now the BNP – have struggled mightily with little impact.

No, I haven't forgotten the Greens, it's just that I'm never sure where they fit on the left-right template. Nor Veritas. Does anyone remember Veritas? It was Robert Kilroy-Silk's vehicle when he fell out with Ukip, also committed to cleaning up British politics, albeit not including Ukip, as things turned out.

So the sensible thing for a Paul Judge to do is either to advocate electoral reform, so that all of the above parties can win seats in a proportional (PR) parliament and do their best to reform politics (and human nature). That would at least make sense. Or they can try to capture a major party.

After all, that's what most successful politicians have to do. Barack Obama just did it. So did Tony Blair's New Labour faction, and Margaret Thatcher's neoliberal allies before that. Lloyd George in his time; Disraeli too. The fact that even the SDP, awash with sitting MPs and ex-cabinet heavyweights such as Roy Jenkins, Shirley Williams and David Owen, could not crack the system should always be cause for reflection.

Of course, part of their problem was the very fact that the SDP did not reflect substantial vested interests, institutionalised and entrenched, deplorable in some ways perhaps, but real. Men and women of goodwill and integrity (plus the inevitable entryists, carpetbaggers, nutters, rascals who are neither, of course) are never enough.

So bold words about interactive technologies opening up political debate are all very well. So is encouragement from the likes of Martin Bell, Helena Kennedy QC and Lord Butler, the former cabinet secretary, though I don't see them actually signing up – let alone rolling up their sleeves.

Today's press release's statement that Douglas Carswell, MP for Harwich, described as a "leading Tory MP" (ho ho), is impressed can be read both ways: as good news and thoroughly depressing. Is that it?

It's always possible that a seismic crisis like the financial meltdown-cum-recession will lead to a reordering of the body politic, though (as noted) it survived fearful upheavals in the last century. To survive now it will have to be even more adaptable and responsive to real needs.

But a new party capturing the reins of power in the state? The BNP? The Greens? Respect? The Jury Team? It's hardly credible, is it? Much more likely that a movement or individual captures a major party, thereby sustaining the appearance of continuity, whatever the rough road that may lie ahead.

That's the British way, isn't it?
