Did you read today's Guardian's scoop about the blacklisted building workers whose careers – and private lives – were collated by a private detective and sold on to construction companies?

The information commission is about to throw the book at them all (we hope) and BBC Radio 4 led its bulletins on the issue at breakfast time. Good. I'm sure the Worcester-based Consulting Association (bland name eh?) identified some rascals in its trawl.

But as Ben Goldacre brilliantly explained to us innumerates in last Saturday's Bad Science column, such list-gathering is mathematically certain to be full of mistakes. People should know about them and have the right to correct them. As a blacklisted worker explained on the radio, a lot of decent workers have lost a lot of work. It won't be confined to building sites either.

That said, we all have sad little secrets. One of mine is that I cannot get as worked up as I am meant to about the threats to liberty that many good people, my own friends included, detect in the growth of invasive technologies that can monitor our lives in great detail. They mean the state, not Tesco or the credit card firms that seem to know quite a lot too.

I understand the issues, but don't quite see it in such lurid terms as the civil liberties posse does. They sometimes seem to be a bit like the tabloids chasing benefit scroungers, social workers or immigrants, having too much fun trying to scare people, feeling good about it but overdoing things in the process. "Wolf, wolf!"

Dreadful, I know, but when I read Jack Straw's apologia for the government's record last week I felt a pang of sympathy. As he said, Labour has screwed up a lot of things – "not achieved a state of grace in terms of the crucial balance between liberty and security" was how he put it – but it is absurd to say it has not extended and protected important freedoms. Come on now, you know that.

That's not to say there isn't plenty to contest: those wretched ID cards (I wouldn't bet on ever having to have one, would you?), the ill-judged 42-day detention, those closed coroners' courts (ministers were retreating on that one last time I checked).

But they are being contested. That's the point, surely; that's why we should be glad that the civil liberties posse keeps shouting even though they sometimes overdo it. That's also why, when even law lords occasionally liken actions by New Labour's Jack Straws to Stalin we know they're talking nonsense.

From reports I read, last week's multi-centred Convention on Modern Liberty, co-sponsored by the Guardian, was a great success. Excellent.

In this spot the other day I recommended an impressive warning on the fragility of the British liberal tradition by the Oxford-based American, Larry Siedentop.

It's the tone you admire as much as the content. Here's another you may have missed, a speech spoken in this little Guardian film from last week's convention which you – like me (sorry, I was babysitting the grandchildren) – may have missed. It has a timeless quality, principles first expounded before al-Qaida's bloody nihilism or CCTV cameras complicated things, but still pretty sound.

The combination of new technologies and the search for security have given the state great powers, but the acquisition of great powers do not mean they should be used, says the speaker. As John Locke wrote long ago: "As soon as men decide that all means are permitted to fight an evil then their good becomes indistinguishable from the evil they set out to destroy.''

Who is saying this? Lord Bingham, the former lord chief justice. He's not right about everything; for instance, the courts have not always been champions of liberty either. But his speech is elegant and worth a few minutes of your time.
