Thursday being the new Friday at Westminster, MPs prepared for the weekend yesterday by discussing a few light hypotheticals such as the official hotline procedure for Whitehall whistleblowers, hopes of a global deal on climate change, and Harriet Harman's leadership prospects.

After the excitement of Wednesday and the Harman-Hague clash at PMQs it was low-key stuff, although Ed Miliband could hardly contain his joy at the new US engagement with melting ice caps. "I look forward to working with President Obama's team in the period ahead," the climate change secretary drooled. 

But first the whistleblowers. This was a bizarre event, staged by the public administration select committee, tagged troublemakers to whom no government would dream of giving a job: Paul Flynn, Gordon Prentice, Julie Morgan, Kelvin Hopkins and their two-brained chairman, Tony Wright. Does shiny, Tory new boy Charles Walker realise that he risks his whole career just by sitting with them?

Giving evidence on whistleblowers and leaks (what are leaks?) was a briskly efficient official called Janet Paraskeva, the civil service regulator. She explained how every department has a kindly soul called the nominated officer to whom staff can complain if they discover ministers are murdering old ladies.

"Not a career-enhancing move" to blow the gaffe, you can see why the brown-envelope-to-David-Hencke option might appeal, suggested Chairman Wright. Not at all, sniffed Aunt Janet. Do you ever check what happens to whistleblowers' careers? wondered a sceptical Ms Morgan. "Not something in our gift to do," came the brisk reply. So for all they know dozens of CIA-rendered civil servants may now be hanging from cellar walls in Kabul or Rabat.

The day's real miracle was that, far from being en route to Rabat, Ms Harman was still at liberty several hours after the PM's plane touched down at Heathrow. Such was his Obama-induced good mood that his deputy's asbo had been modified so she could return to the Commons for the day's debate on "support for women in the economic downturn".

But first she had to navigate routine questions in her role as leader of the Commons. From the moment her Tory shadow, Alan Duncan, rose to say "May I invite the leader - [theatrical pause amid sarcastic cries of "very good"] - of the House to give us next week's business" it was clear that at least one woman will not be wholly supported during whatever downturn she faces. When the women-in-the-downturn debate finally started, she told MPs that blokes won't be getting it all their own way at the G20 either. 

Why, the Townswomen's Guild, the Fawcett Society and the WTUC had just been discussing the economy at No 11. "Their views will be fed into the London summit." Their views on what? Quantitative easing? The setting temperature of jam? Harman did not say. We all know what happens to leakers.
