Times are hard for local councils. But then, they usually are. Different this time is the prospect that the latest financial squeeze will last a decade. Alistair Darling promised town halls no more than an extra 1.2% in real terms after 2010. But that was before he started spending real money rescuing banks. If David Cameron wins power the squeeze will be tighter still. How about 0%?

It gets worse. Voters losing jobs increase demands on local services just as council revenues drop and businesses demand (and get) help from Whitehall paying their rates. This year's council tax rises average 3%, the lowest for a decade. But £1,413.85 (up £41) for an average Band D home will still feel a burden.

Which is why Tony Travers, local government guru at the LSE, is warning Labour not to dismiss boasts by aggressive Tory councils like Hammersmith and Fulham in west London that they can cut council tax (by 3% again this year) and still maintain services. Forced to chose between lower council taxes and service cuts poorer voters will pick the latter, he predicts.

This week the Acas conciliation service piled on pressure when it awarded 1.4 million council employees 2.75% instead of 2.45%. Councils say it will mean more job losses. Does that mean cuts in services too? Or worse child protection, which the Audit Commission yesterday highlighted in many of England's 150 children's departments? Not necessarily. The commission also reported other services are getting better.

Experts predict one trend will intensify: outsourcing of council services to public, private or third sector contractors. Inevitably, they are a mixed bag. Not every Labour MP sees them as a byword for wage cuts and inefficiency. "They make a lot of my colleagues flinch, but they couldn't be much worse than my council," says one. 

By the same token, the Tory party chairman Eric Pickles, Bradford town hall veteran, doubts Tory Essex will, or should, outsource most of its services, as it threatens to do. Pickles is a down-to-earth MP in the county, who came into national politics long after the chainsmoking Thatcherite Nick Ridley described his perfect council: one which meets once a year to hand out contracts. It is what Barnet council hopes to become: a mere "outsourcing hub".

Labour deplored this trend while shifting slowly towards its own more strategic view, "steering, not rowing" in the delivery of services. Essex Lib Dems deplore the council's behaviour, but in Lib Dem-run Somerset they outsource too. Merging English councils into larger unitary authorities is another money-saving wheeze, though Pickles is keen to retain local accountability. Instead he urges a cross-party consensus towards "partnerships", councils together outsourcing shared back-office services, IT or planning. One Oxfordshire Lib Dem council is even sharing its chief executive with its Tory-controlled neighbour to save money. Necessity drives.
