Despite the machine guns and plate glass security around Westminster nowadays, parliament has never been so open, either to tourists or to the kind of aspiring MPs who were once actively discouraged - women, ethnic and sexual minorities, and disabled people. The place is no longer a men's club. But it isn't enough.

Which is why Gordon Brown prodded his fellow Scot, Michael Martin, into establishing what is only the sixth cross-party Speaker's Conference since 1900 - the first since 1978 - to consider declining electoral turnout as well as a more representative body of peers and MPs. Consisting of a suitable cross-section of 18 MPs, it was taking evidence yesterday at Church House, behind the abbey.

The day's star turn was Trevor Phillips, chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, who told the inquiry that the kind of positive discrimination whereby all-women shortlists shrank the gender ratio to 80:20% was now needed to promote ethnic minority candidates. There should be "more people who have experience of different kinds of life than your average white, middle-class male", he said.

Ex-TV reporter, Labour politician and London mayoral candidate (defeated), Phillips repeated his recent suggestion that term limits, say of four parliaments for MPs and peers, might speed the rate of change. Interesting, though it would have expelled Brown and Tony Blair in 2003. "What we are proposing is a catalytic measure that would change the game essentially," he said.

What is the position in 2009? Of 649 MPs, 125 are women (94 Labour, 17 Tory, nine Lib Dem), 15 are from ethnic minorities, and those classed as disabled - let alone as gay or trans-gender - are not listed, though Aberdeen South's Anne Begg, a wheelchair user, is on the Speaker's Conference team. In theory women should be about half the total, and ethnic minorities about 60 MPs, instead of the likely 25 after the next election.

Such progress is real and compares well with most EU states, except on the gender balance. Most Scandinavian countries do almost as well as Rwanda, the world leader at 49% women MPs. In the very-white European parliament Britain does best (five non-white MEPs). Nicolas Sarkozy's government has made a conscious effort to catch up in France where women got the vote only in 1944 - 51 years after New Zealand.

As in much else on the equality agenda the US remains a laggard, despite the presence of Barack Obama in the White House. After all, Margaret Thatcher was a very dominant prime minister for 11 years, but she had just one woman, Lady Young, in her cabinet - for barely a year - and her party has only grasped its acute gender deficiency under David Cameron. 

Only 14 Tory women and three from ethnic minorities have been picked for vacant safe seats next time, says John Bercow MP, a convert to equality.

But politics has to look more attractive in a wider sense if capable, ambitious people are to engage. That constitutes a challenge to majority and minorities alike.
