It is wrong to suggest, as some are doing, that Harriet Harman was manoeuvring to be the next Labour leader when she said that Fred Goodwin's pension is "not enforceable in the court of public opinion" on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show yesterday.

Far from it; if such calculations had been on Hattie's mind she would not have said what she said. Why? Because it serves chiefly to remind Labour MPs that, brave, feisty woman that she is, she's not leadership material. Too impulsive, too emotional, not enough GCSEs.

So even a bright teenager – not a civil liberties lawyer, not a cabinet minister, not the deputy leader of the Labour party – would have spotted the Marr remark as a clanger and held their tongue. She managed to sidestep other Marr banana skins trailed during the programme.

The awkward fact is that parliament cannot simply confiscate Goodwin's pension; he would be straight off to the courts, carrying Labour's Human Rights Act under his arm. Whatever is to be done – declare RBS formally bankrupt, says Vince Cable – it will have to be legally sustainable if we are all not to lose even more money to overfed lawyers.

But why pick on Harman? George Osborne may still want to be the next Tory leader, and he was on TV yesterday, too, promising to support "any legal measure to try and get this pension back" and demanding tougher regulation of the City.

It's just the opposite of what he and David Cameron were urging until well after the financial economy's engines stalled in mid-2007, plunging the aircraft into the Hudson river, there to be rescued by US taxpayers – by British ones too over here. (By the way, did you notice that Canadian banking, alone among the G7, has held up quite well?)

But just as the shadow justice secretary, Dominic Grieve, denounced Jack Straw's decision to withhold the cabinet's Iraq war papers while actually agreeing with it, George 'n' Dave have said many things while not actually opposing most of what the government has done since the crisis broke, the 2.5% VAT cut being a notable exception.

As things stand, the pair are in a perilously exposed position which no amount of abuse by them or their media allies can wholly dispel. Yes, we can all agree that Gordon Brown made serious errors of macro-economic management, which he would be wise to admit (this week's speech to Congress might be a suitable forum).

But the Tory leadership is virtually on its own in asserting that now – when so many businesses and opportunities are collapsing – is the time to retrench on public spending and to raise taxes sharply. It isn't, not yet.

As usual, shrewd Vince Cable is on stronger ground. Declaring RBS technically bankrupt would cut Sir Fred's pension to around £27,000 according to the government's formula to protect employees of bankrupt firms, he explains.

It's tempting. Even the Observer's Andrew Rawnsley, not given to populist outcry, is tempted this weekend. What's more, some accountants insist that £16m is way too low to finance a £650,000 annual payout, especially on current returns: more like £30m they tell me.

So refusing to pay out and letting Fred go to court might be fun. But is it smart or wise? The rule of law matters more than mere money, and retrospective legislation that would be needed to clobber Fred and his kind is (usually) wrong.

I'm much more interested in getting the government's trained legal and revenue bloodhounds to find out where Fred might have fallen foul of due process. And what about the unreconstructed RBS board's role in all this? Did it mislead ministers at a time when their minds were focused on saving the tottering banking system, not on individual pensions?

And is it significant, for instance, that Fred hung on until after he passed his 50th birthday on 17 August last year, a significant pension milestone? Such answers are above my paygrade. Yes, I realise that Lehman Brothers was allowed to go bust in September, the crucial event. I realise all concerned are busy. But we need to know.
