I was planning to leave the stoning of Fred 'the Shred' Goodwin to others who enjoy this kind of work more than I do.

I was once a dinner guest of Goodwin's at Coutts bank, on the Strand, eating profits he didn't turn out to have.

Around a table full of large egos talking politics, he was probably the least memorable, the least engaged. Why had he arranged it, I wondered? What was it for?

But having just heard John Prescott on Radio 4's Today programme delivering a tremendous populist rant against my host and what, I suppose, we must call the banking community – one of the many multicultural communities with which our society must engage more closely – I thought it worth sharing.

Prezza, who has reinvented himself on the internet at 70, denounced the "greed, greed, greed" of the bankers and denounced those – the Tories and the media – now trying to deflect blame on to the government.

Take Goodwin's £16m pension pot away from him and dare him to sue for it, he said. Tricky but tempting, I muttered, though the Daily Mail agrees.

My own thought when I heard of Goodwin's fascinating defiance of Lord Myners's request to hand back his banknote collection was that the Inland Revenue might care to inspect his affairs.

That's what the Americans would do. The Internal Revenue Service is as fearsome as a Swat team.

But Prescott was not stopping there. I haven't heard a leftwing populist outburst like this morning's from a senior Labour figure for years. It was quite refreshing.

"I am proud to belong to a government which provided 10 years of prosperity and social justice on a scale we have not seen in this country. We provided ideal financial circumstances ... to the advantage of financiers ... They took advantage of it. It was called greed, greed, greed," I noted Prezza more or less saying.

That begs a lot of questions, as Today's economically super-literate Evan Davis tried to remind him.

Didn't the government have some responsibility here? Prezza was very civil to Davis, an interesting detail in itself, but still wasn't having it.

He's wrong, of course. Yes, all countries are in terrible economic shape, not just Labour Britain. But that is not an acquittal.

The government, chiefly in the shape of the then chancellor Gordon Brown and Tony Blair, who wouldn't stand up to him sufficiently, made a number of serious macro-errors, knowing that tax revenues would fund its expensive social programmes.

So it allowed a structural hole to develop in the budget in the good times. Its tripartite regulatory regime didn't match up to the tsunami developing out in the financial ocean. It took housing costs out of the inflation index making the bubble harder to prick.

As Dan Roberts writes in today's Guardian and St Vincent of Cable seems to agree, they may still be getting bank reconstruction wrong, though it's a nightmare. Etc.

But on the fundamental point, Prescott is far more right than wrong, and it's worth repeating every day.

The overwhelming bulk of responsibility for the dire situation Larry Elliott warns about today (Larry was preaching gloom before the bust, so he's entitled) lies at the feet of the financial sector.

So whether or not ex-Guardian capo Myners knew how much the RBS board had agreed to pay Feckless Fred – or whether it was legally obliged to do so or if the whole board even knew either – it doesn't change the basic proposition, whatever the Tory MP Michael Fallon is saying now.

The board did it. The board has questions to answer. Where are those intrusive tabloids when we need them to go through a few bins?

It was the bankers' decade. They told interfering politicians and regulators not to spoil the party.

Labour was too compliant, but the Tories wet their knickers with excitement in the milieu.

Hot City money flowing into the coffers at Tory HQ all these years may yet be the one fatal obstacle to City scion David Cameron's accession to power.

Only Dr Vince's record looks good – and even his lot took £2.5m from a convicted crook and, Fred-like, won't hand it back.

So repeat after me: the bankers did it. As they said during Watergate: "Follow the money."

Footnote: It's also worth asking just how much is it worth to Goodwin to be the Most Hated Man in Britain?

It's all very well to have a £650,000-a-year pension, but less attractive if you can barely leave home and nice people cross the street to avoid you.

As we noted here yesterday, money doesn't guarantee happiness, though it helps. Would Fred be happier if he gave half back, or three quarters?

Would he be really happy if he gave it all back and became a social worker?

Such penitence worked for John Profumo, the disgraced war minister in the Christine Keeler affair: 40 years of modesty and good works in the East End made him a respected figure again by the time he died.
