Are we trying to send too many of our young people to university, more than the country can afford? Vince Cable, the Lib Dems' saintly Treasury spokesman, suggested so on Radio 4 this morning.

Shock, horror, scandal! Can he be right? Perhaps. It's tricky one.

Trying to reach Tony Blair's declared target of 50% of youngsters going to college is very expensive, and we won't be able to afford it as we pay the bill for rescuing the banks, Dr Vince told the Today programme's Evan Davis. Shock, horror etc, again!

But first, the context.

John Redwood was also interviewed, and proposed to cut public spending, so no surprise there. So was leftwinger Michael Meacher, who sensibly conceded the need for economies on spending, provided poor people – who didn't cause the crisis – are protected.

Davis later interviewed George Osborne, the real shadow chancellor, and – being an economist himself – got impatient with his waffly evasions about curbing public sector pay and chopping the salaries of quango chiefs who are paid more than the prime minister.

According to the latest estimate by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, Britain is going to need to save/raise an extra £40bn a year in taxes – £1,250 per family – or cuts to provide a credible long-term path towards paying off the extra debt generated by the crisis, Davis reminded him.

"It sends a very powerful signal that the age of excess is over," protested Osborne. It will take more than signals, replied the numerate Davis; public sector pay is £170bn, so you can't get £40bn out of that, be it in quangos or workers' pay.

But it was Vince who rattled off specific targets for economy. Can we afford the current levels of public sector pensions (Osborne also mentioned that)? Can we afford Gordon Brown's elaborate tax credit system that helps the working poor? Can we afford our still-extensive defence commitments?

In fairness to the Tories, Tim Montgomerie, the party's internet gadfly, has been asking such questions on ConservativeHome about the need to cut projects that hurt Tory feelings too, the Trident nuclear submarine renewal, for instance.

I imagine that's what Cable had in mind, too. The author of a sharp new book on the economic crisis, The Storm (Atlantic Books, £14.99), Vince may even have been stung by Simon Jenkins's condescending review in yesterday's Sunday Times. A good diagnosis, but hopeless on how to get us out of this mess.

"Vince Cable is just too Liberal Democrat. He's too mild in his judgment of politicians from Margaret Thatcher to Gordon Brown … at heart a nostalgic optimist, an old liberal yearning for a better yesterday," writes Sir Simon, who would patronise God himself if he ever dared write another book.

But, hey, here we are being distracted. What about those student numbers? Tony Blair used to get all feeble and hurt and accuse people of elitism if they questioned the wisdom of packing kids off to university in such large numbers. I know; I tried it.

Many go to academic courses to which they may not best be suited, others to do vocational ones for which fewer jobs exist – media studies – or which render you unsuitable to do the job. There is anecdotal evidence that nursing degrees do that. Blair never had answers for that.

The case for providing better education to young people is self-evident. This weekend's media is full of gloom about how indisciplined, under-educated and self-indulgent parents are making life very hard for teachers and most of their offspring's fellow pupils.

There's also a utilitarian argument that says the kids need to raise their skills level in the new world order where millions of educated, disciplined Chinese and Indian graduates are coming on to the jobs market – and that they might as well keep learning in a recession: it's part of the fiscal stimulus.

But that policy also runs the same risk as Soviet steel targets. No point in pumping the stuff out at great expense if the world has moved on and no one wants to buy it. Far from being a guaranteed ticket to higher lifetime pay, the salary differentials – supply and demand – are shrinking.

All that's guaranteed to the individual and to society is the cost of that education, which may not be all that great anyway. One of my kids did a media studies course at one of the best ex-polytechnics.

He emerged in good shape, much the better for it, and is gainfully employed. But his take on his course is severe: he largely taught himself, he sometimes says. Perhaps that's the point of university ...

Right or wrong, I'm a sceptic and when I hear that well educated people have encouraged their children to train as plumbers, I am not dismayed. There's always a secure income for good hardworking plumbers, even ones who don't speak Polish.

So Vince's little bombshell is a challenge to us all. Expect him to be condemned by the usual suspects.
