I forget who it was who said that if you can fake sincerity you've got it made. Alas, there is some truth in that observation, but the genuine article is much better, and sometimes we get it – and know it.

In all the over-pitched rhetoric and pomp which unavoidably accompanied the necessary hard work at the G20 summit this week there was one moment of emotional authenticity which will stay with me long after many important details of the summit communique have done their work (or not) and been forgotten.

It happened at the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson school in north London, a state school where 50-plus languages are spoken and where Michelle Obama addressed 100 teenage girls after watching the choir sing Whitney Houston's Believe. As you can tell from the tremble in the voice during this YouTube clip the first lady seems genuinely affected by what she has seen and heard. 

But if you stick with Part II she also manages to deliver her important message about "love, strong values and a good education". It is, she said, what has taken her from working-class South Side Chicago to the White House with no built-in advantages – except a "stay-at-home mom" and an increasingly disabled father (he had MS) who insisted on struggling in to work.

Michelle Obama is not an elected public official, but she's married to one who has also prevailed over considerable adversity, only just starting the really hard part too. So we can be impressed by a performance which combines discipline with evident emotion. "I do hugs," she is reported as saying to the girls, who promptly behaved as if she were Whitney Houston. 

Authentic emotion in public life is tricky. Tony Blair was good at emotional connection, Bill Clinton even better. In the long run over-reliance on tricks of empathy – "I feel your pain" – often turns against a politician, as it did against those two.

Watching Barack Obama this week, he struck me as very private, a reserved and thoughtful man, who weighs eloquent words carefully: Professor Obama. His remarkable memoir, Dreams From My Father, while telling the reader a great deal, also contains striking omissions. "No Drama Obama" can hit the rhetorical high notes, but he also does reticence, perhaps his instinctive position. A disciplined wife whose voice can tremble with near-surface emotion can be an asset, though discipline (which Cherie lacked) is the key.

There is no winning formula in public life. Thatcher was most authentic as a warrior, less so empathising, though she had her soft side. Ronald Reagan made audiences feel cheerier. Churchill wept like a leaky tap, Attlee was admired for a reticence which was just as authentic and recognised as such. Nicholas Sarkozy sometimes behaves like a man in therapy.

As for Nelson Mandela, the man whose control over his own emotions made a great contribution to the peaceful resolution of a great historic wrong, he must have bottled up unimaginable distress and kept up that winning smiling. Fake? Sometimes, perhaps, but fundamentally sound. And people watching knew it.
