Picking through the debris of the G20 summit I can't help but remember a favourite saying of Tony Benn's, the one about politics being about "issues, not personalities". His own career has long belied the claim. So do the dynamics of this week's London conference. It's always a subtle blend of both.

Let me confess right away that I was mesmerised by the summit pictures of Silvio Berlusconi sticking himself between Presidents Obama and Medvedev, a hand on each shoulder, and posing like a tourist. How could he?

Very easily in Berlusconi's case. He'd do it to God. Rather more delicately intriguing is another bit of what : was the Queen or Michelle Obama first to put their arm around the other? Does it matter, I hear you shout. No, but it's interesting.

This morning's media consensus is that the summit achieved more than might have been expected, less than might have been hoped. More on important matters like expansion of the IMF's credit facilities, so important to fragile developing economies, more on bank and tax haven regulation; less on additional fiscal expansion and toxic assets; little on greening the global economy, albeit it more than last time.

Hedge funds will be regulated for the first time. Whoopee! But hedge funds were not the ones that screwed up. It was highly (but poorly) regulated banks that did it. Offshore tax havens will be brought into line. Whoopee again! But great states could shut them all down tomorrow (by turning off the electricity for starters) and choose not to. We call it hypocrisy.

Will Gordon Brown have woken up happier this morning? It's another mixed issues/personality question. I'd like to think he leapt out of bed whistling and gave Mrs B a big kiss, but have my doubts: happy is not what he's here for.

Yet this was probably the high point of Brown's premiership, his moment in history, competently hosting the first truly representative global summit of its kind, one that might – might – come to be seen as turning a very nasty corner.

Only time will tell. Nicolas Sarkozy, whose excitable blend of issues and personality may well be a function of his height, was quick to declare himself a winner and proclaim that the 1945-2009 Bretton Woods era of international finance is finally over.

That is likely to be true, not because of what he and Angela Merkel insisted upon in the ExCel centre yesterday, but because China has quietly retaken its place at the centre of world affairs after a 500 year trip to the loo. India too, perhaps, though that is less clear.

Hu Jintao, the Chinese president, seems to eschew the personality cult, probably because China overdosed on that sort of thing under Chairman Mao and is still in recovery mode. India's cerebral PM, Manmohan Singh, has an election looming fast, one he may lose.

So does Brown within 14 months. The summit can have done him no harm, may equally do him little or no good. How – and if – it impacts on jobs (3,000 lost yesterday, but signs of a credit recovery too), business liquidity, mortgages and the rest is what will decide the election.

None of that is remotely clear as the summiteers fly home or on to the Nato summit in Strasbourg where Franco-German ideas about a more regulated world will not stretch to putting their troops into harm's way against the Taliban as it extends its hand-chopping enthusiasm into Pakistan.

What is clear is that Professor Obama – as I have decided to call the president occasionally – can do the glad-handing, and being pawed by Berlusconi, with sufficient grace, whatever his private thoughts.

He laid the special relationship on with a trowel for London's benefit this week. Even the demonstrators on the street seem to have given him a gentler time than they would have given You Know Who.

Likewise Michelle Obama, whose evidently heartfelt (her voice cracked) pep talk to teenage schoolgirls at the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson school is worth a YouTube look. I defy even the blogosphere hard men – come on, you know who you are – not to be a little touched. By such simple messages ("love, strong values and a good education") lives are changed. Me, I liked the blue outfit too, whatever the fashionistas say.

I remain intrigued by the royal protocol scandal which excited the US network TV commentators yesterday. They love to see us as strange, quaint and exotic and probably imagined that the street demos were all royalist. How dare she touch the Queen!

From clips I've seen it does look as if Mrs O slipped her arm around Her Maj and was reciprocated. But no, the Mail has a revisionist version this morning from royal biographer, Michael Thornton.

He suggests the Queen gets the significance of the Obamas, liked them and decided to push the boat out with a rare royal pat – what Guardian expert Dr Peter Collett calls a "power touch". Naturally a sassy Harvard-educated woman from the South Side of Chicago is going to touch back.

So that makes it all right. What a relief!

You may not know this but, contrary to stereotype about those stuffy Windsors, Her Maj has been expressing personal warmth towards a host of African leaders ever since Kwame Nkrumah took Ghana to independence in 1957 and the Queen to the dance floor.

Nelson Mandela gets away with calling her "my friend, Elizabeth", which is like squeezing her knee. So new best friends from Kenya-Hawaii-Middle America must be all in a day's work.
