It was movie day in the Yankee clubhouse. The lads pulled up folding chairs and leaned back to watch a mandatory training video. Popcorn was not served. Neither were Tic Tacs.

The video was not one of those gruesome medical films that soldiers used to be shown in basic training, but rather a seminar on the Yankee way of doing things, including how to conduct an interview with the news media.

Life goes on despite the 800-pound gorilla in their midst, Alex Rodriguez, who takes up considerable space and oxygen in the clubhouse, but does, of course, hit a lot of home runs. 

The vapid answers by Rodriguez on Tuesday regarding his three-year flirtation with steroids — he said he knew they were not Tic Tacs — continued to haunt the Yankees on the first full day of spring training. Before they took the field, the Yankees were shown how to be at least minimally helpful to the news media. For empirical evidence, the Yankees could have observed their captain, Derek Jeter, after the morning workout, conducting his annual address on the first day of spring training. 

Three of the last five years, Jeter has had to discuss an apology or confession by somebody caught with his hand in the forbidden cookie jar — Jason Giambi in 2005, Andy Pettitte last year and now Rodriguez. 

Jeter did not seem amused at having to discuss his old pal A-Rod and his magical mystery tour of the pharmaceutical world, circa 2001-3. This was not exactly what Jeter wanted to be doing after gamboling on the main diamond, fielding grounders and taking batting practice.

He wanted no part of the large tent behind left field, where the Pettitte and Rodriguez mea culpas have been staged the last two years. Bad karma under that awning. Instead, Jeter met the news media in the Yankee dugout. 

Jeter came in with a message rather than politely deflecting reporters’ questions, as he sometimes does. He said he was tired of hearing about the Loosey-Goosey Theory of Drug Use in the Past Generation that Rodriguez had suggested Tuesday. Jeter did everything but call it poppycock.

“One thing that irritates me is that this was the steroid era,” Jeter said. “I don’t know how many people tested positive, but everybody wasn’t doing it.”

He reiterated that he never took performance-enhancing drugs and was never tempted to do so. Jeter has resisted any loose talk that he could probably be a power hitter and has been quite satisfied with his role as an agile shortstop who occasionally hit the ball over the fence.

Jeter left the impression that he was supportive of his teammate mainly because Rodriguez is his teammate. He said he was disappointed in Rodriguez, but he was sure Rodriguez was disappointed in himself. 

Without sounding like a goody-goody, Jeter also let it be known that he was prepared for temptation by his father, Charles, a drug and alcohol counselor, and his mother, Dorothy, an accountant. 

“You’re educated,” he said about his family lessons, adding, “If you do some things, eventually the truth will come out.” 

Jeter was also asked about the claim by Rodriguez that he was hampered because he signed for a bonus after high school and never benefited from a college education.

“Never went, man,” Jeter said, meaning he turned down his beloved University of Michigan to play minor league ball. 

Somewhere between sympathetic and judgmental, Jeter gave a masterly performance. Another expert with the news media is Johnny Damon, one of the 26 Yankees who attended A-Rod’s news conference Tuesday. 

“I thought it was pretty cool,” Damon said of the large turnout. As for some of the varsity-level players who did not attend, Damon explained, “Some people had things to do with their families, finding a place to live.” 

Damon said he supported Rodriguez because “Alex is a huge part of the team.”

“We need him,” Damon said. “He’s a super-nice guy. He gets killed in the media, but he would do anything for you. He made a mistake, and he came clean.”

Asked about the claim by Rodriguez that he lacked good judgment because he had gone directly into baseball after high school, Damon replied: “Absolutely. I signed out of high school. I felt I had to do it. But I missed all those summers, I missed hanging out with my friends. It took me 14-15 years to understand I missed that part of my life.”

Like Jeter, Damon did not condone the use of steroids by his teammate, saying: “With his gift, I don’t understand why a gifted athlete would do that to himself, but he had a drive to be better than anybody who played the game. I still think when his career is over people will put him in that breadth, in that category.”

Damon’s nuanced evaluation of Rodriguez was different from Jeter’s, but both were worthy of being displayed on next year’s training video.

