Outside, the wind was whipping down Park Avenue, but inside, Robin Roberts and Larry Christenson, Phillies pitchers from different eras, were discussing the joy of watching their own home runs fly over fences. That immediately raised the temperature about 60 degrees. 

It’s funny how that works. Just a few months ago I was sleepwalking during the late-night dance marathon of the World Series, muttering how they should start the doggone games earlier. But a few months of winter and football brought on seasonal affective disorder of the soul. 

Baseball does not make it easy. There’s the Bonds trial looming in San Francisco and the Clemens inquiry in Washington and the unnecessary Joe Torre book (not that I don’t like gossip) and the Yankees’ maneuvers with vanished parkland in the Bronx. Now we are realizing just how seriously cursed the Mets are with that name on their new ballpark.

Somehow baseball remains the best American sport, coming at just the right time every year. It arrived for me on Tuesday, the afternoon of the annual dinner for the Baseball Assistance Team, the charity that aids former players down on their luck. 

Roberts, 82, a Hall of Famer, is retired in Florida after working as a broadcaster and a college coach. Christenson, 55, who won 83 games for the Phillies from 1973 to 1983, has done well with his investment company outside Philadelphia. 

Having pitched for the Phillies in separate World Series — Roberts in the loss in 1950, Christenson in the championship in 1980 — both are still glowing about their old team’s success in October. Old-timers sometimes grump about the new breed, but Roberts said he loves to watch Jimmy Rollins run out a triple the way speedsters like Bobby Thomson and Stan Musial did back in his day.

“Bobby ran so well that I would stop and look at him even when he hit one off me,” Roberts said.

In the bonhomie of a good lunch, I was not about to bring up the fact that Roberts holds the major league record for home runs yielded, 505. He also won 286 games on mostly bad teams. 

Roberts thinks everybody overthinks pitching today. Teams get a youngster with a live arm, and they mess with his delivery and they mess with his mind, producing the insecure six-inning nibblers we see most days.

Serene smiles came over the two right-handers as they recalled their own home runs, back when both leagues played the authentic version of baseball, before the ghastly designated-hitter rule. There were giants in those days. Roberts knew, right off the top of his head, that Wes Ferrell leads the pitchers’ list with 38 homers (one as a pinch-hitter), followed by Bob Lemon with 37, Warren Spahn with 35, Red Ruffing with 34, Earl Wilson with 33 and Don Drysdale with 29.

Roberts said he hit five homers in his career. (I looked it up — the last was off Carl Erskine in 1956, in a place called Ebbets Field.) Thoroughly deferential to his Hall of Fame friend, Christenson said softly, “I hit 11” — including two in one game off an aging Mickey Lolich. 

Christenson was sure he would have hit many more, except that his pal Dick Ruthven got traded and told his new teammates that Christenson could not hit a curveball. Curveballs to a pitcher? That just wasn’t fair. 

Then Roberts remembered another home run in his life, and here is where the sun began to beam directly onto our table — no easy trick for a north-facing restaurant.

Once again, Roberts was the Whiz Kid who made his debut at 21. He was recalling the frequent Mondays and Thursdays off in the old days of 154-game seasons, where sometimes you’d be in a town with nothing to do. Roberts, who was born in Springfield, Ill., remembered visiting an old friend in Chicago who suddenly remembered he had a softball game that afternoon. 

In Chicago, they play with a ball 16 inches in circumference, and they get very offended if you call it mushball, since the ball is not mushy. Roberts was prepared to watch, but his friend came over and said his team was short a player, would Roberts help them out? 

“Probably wasn’t a very good idea,” said Roberts, considering he was an All-Star workhorse being asked to play a sport that did not allow gloves. “But I played short center field and the outfielders would call for the ball and I’d get out of their way.” 

Nobody spotted him as No. 36 for the Phillies. He was just an athletic guy in street clothes playing mushball near the lake.

Late in the game, Roberts came to bat. Nearly six decades later, his face lighted up as he recalled smashing a long home run, over everybody’s head, out of the park, maybe even into Lake Michigan. Roberts raised his immortal right hand to attest to the rising trajectory of his home run. 

Now it was mid-July and it was a day game and the brutal sound system was turned down and Jimmy Rollins was batting against Johan Santana, and I knew for sure the slush and the Super Bowl would soon pass.

