Last year at this time, Jerry Manuel was a bench coach for the Mets, on record saying that if no managing job came up he would eventually coach at William Jessup University, a small Christian college near Sacramento.

Jessup is still a couple of years from fielding its first baseball team. And Jerry Manuel is otherwise occupied, for the moment. With major league managers, it’s always for the moment.

Manuel’s first task is to build up the ego and the game smarts of a team that stunk out Shea Stadium in the final days, for the second straight season, after Manuel had replaced Willie Randolph on June 17.

Manuel did not mind sharing his priorities on Saturday as he addressed the news media for the first time this spring training. He disclosed that he was toying with batting José Reyes third instead of leadoff. He suggested that the Mets not blame the “obvious” — the collapse of the bullpen — and instead look to their individual failures to move runners over when asked. 

Manuel displayed almost delight when he was asked about the way the champion Phillies had been woofing about beating out his Mets. Cole Hamels, the pitching star of the World Series, has been rather direct that the Mets had choked.

“Anytime somebody calls you out, it creates a great challenge,” Manuel said. How did he feel about the Phils’ attitude? “I like it,” he said. “It’s good for baseball. We’ll see how guys feel about that. I let guys rest in the winter, but because a lot of guys came early, that’s a good sign.” 

It seems like only yesterday that the Mets trudged off, replaced by a dream sequence straight out of “Field of Dreams” — Tom Seaver and Keith Hernandez, Ed Charles and Ron Hunt, but the pageant did not help the fans get over the second straight autumnal failure. 

One collapse, the fans could shrug off. Two in a row? That tends to stick up front in collective memory. 

Nevertheless, the Mets are going to give it another try. Last February, Randolph tried to get past the Collapse of ’07 by acting as if the Mets were too professional to talk much about such awful events. Manuel later said he might have confronted 2007 a little more openly. 

Now Manuel has presided over another disaster, the Slump of ’08. He said that a lot of pitchers and catchers in camp were not with the team last year, so it would be a waste for him to address the collapse last year, but he said he would get to it later in spring training. 

Last year, he made his impression right away with sprightly and pertinent remarks, always showing respect for his friend Randolph, now the bench coach for Milwaukee. 

On Saturday, Manuel did not mention the elbow injury to Billy Wagner, their ace relief pitcher, now recuperating from surgery and not likely to pitch for the Mets again. And he did not blame the loss of Fernando Tatis, the vagabond outfielder who had been one of their best clutch hitters until he injured his shoulder. 

Something deeper has been going on with these Mets — namely, the absence of that one star who would take over, carry them through, the way Derek Jeter did for the old Yankees, starting a rally with a double, reaching second base and clapping his hands and smiling toward the dugout. The Mets need more of that, with consistency.

Manuel gave an unusual candidate to raise the Mets’ awareness on the field, nominating the mercurial Reyes to be more involved in the pitch counts and positioning from shortstop, and to not worry about statistics, namely stolen bases. 

Managers often make a statement with their first move. When Manuel took over last June, he spread his slightly calculated but still refreshing “gangsta” talk in the clubhouse. There was no negative message there. Everybody on the club knows he is a religious and cerebral man who uses “gangsta” with a very light touch, just to have some fun with the discrepancy — the graybeard, hardcover-book-reading manager as rapper. 

The other move was to mention to the news media, not necessarily casually, that he wanted his players to be unafraid to be thrown out occasionally while trying to take an extra base. Just be loose, he said. He mentioned Carlos Delgado by name. 

A reporter relayed that message to Delgado, who had been among the emotionally missing during the Randolph regime, for reasons we will probably never know. The assumption was that Delgado was just about done, but he smiled at the challenge to run more, as if to say, Whacky Jerry, and Delgado wound up hitting 38 homers and driving in 115 runs.

Now Manuel has to find a way to unlock the production from Reyes to Carlos Beltrán to David Wright to Delgado. He was about his business on Friday, delivering guy-hugs to his players in the locker room that now belongs to him, for the moment. William Jessup University can wait.

