The weather forecast for Wednesday’s Mexico-United States soccer match includes thunderstorms, wind gusts, and temperature dropping from the 50s. 

Asked how he felt about the Americans’ scheduling a World Cup qualifier in mid-Ohio in mid-February, the coach of Mexico reminded everybody about the slogan of the world soccer federation: “Fair Play.” 

Of course, the coach of Mexico is from Sweden, and he coached the English national team for five years. Sven-Goran Eriksson has seen some weather in his time. 

“Normally, in Mexico, well, it rains a lot,” Eriksson added with a chuckle. 

The Mexicans, who are not what they used to be, are here in the capital of Ohio because the home team always gets to choose the site of World Cup qualifiers. 

American officials placed the game here because they believe central Ohio has fewer Latinos per capita than, say, warm-weather ports like Miami or Houston or Los Angeles, which are not about to host a regional World Cup qualifying match any time soon. 

That is the legal gamesmanship of sports — nothing like players taking steroids or colleges admitting athletes with bad grades, but more like baseball teams mowing the grass to help their bunters, or pouring water on the basepaths to try to drown a visiting base-stealer. Do what you can do. 

Eriksson did not whine about the placement of the game. Mexico will play the United States in August in its hallowed Azteca Stadium, where noise and altitude are more formidable than a February thunderstorm whipping through. The question is whether Eriksson will make it to Azteca. He hears the rumors that if Mexico loses to its rival on Wednesday, he is out. He gave the distinct impression he would not mind a return to the Premier League.

Mexico has been running through national coaches as the Americans have won eight and tied two matches on United States soil in the past decade. Yet the traveling Mexican team never lacks for support wherever it plays. 

There will be sombreros in the parking lot Wednesday, even if the fans, having driven from Chicago or the East Coast or Dallas, cannot get tickets. They will stand in the parking lot and cheer. 

On Monday night, in damp but relatively warm weather, a cluster of Mexican fans gathered outside Crew Stadium and banged on drums and chanted “Si, se puede!” (Yes, we can), nearly drowning out the news conferences in an adjacent tent. Mexico-United States in soccer just may be the best international rivalry in the Americas. The Mexicans used to carry an attitude across the border, but in mid-February of 2001, the Americans beat El Tricolor, 2-0, in Columbus, and a little air started to go out of the Mexicans’ psychological balloon.

Then in the World Cup of 2002, in Jeonju, South Korea, the Americans played just about the best match their national team has ever played, running through and around the Mexicans in a 2-0 victory in the Round of 16. The effect was the tough guy at the beach who takes a shot in the sternum and his knees buckle. Mexico has never been the same, at least north of the border. 

Eriksson is new to this part of the world. He was a successful coach at four clubs in Serie A in Italy, then coached the national team of England for five and a half years before an appearance at Manchester City last season. 

He smiled when asked how he felt about playing in the Midwest in mid-February. He said he had the bad luck to coach England for the exact five and a half years that Wembley, the national stadium in London, was being rebuilt, so he never coached a game there. 

Did England choose exotic corners for difficult opponents? No, Eriksson said. 

“They played in the biggest stadiums like Old Trafford in Manchester, because they wanted as many fans to see the game as possible,” he said.

Of course, in England, a home crowd is an advantage, which is not the case in the United States — certainly not against Mexico. Eriksson is at a disadvantage on Wednesday. One loss to the Yanks could be enough to get him sacked. But in the ever-churning world of big-time soccer, Portsmouth suddenly needs a coach, and mighty Chelsea sacked Big Phil Scolari the other day. The Dutch miracle man, Guus Hiddink, may take the Chelsea job for this season, but there is always next year. 

Just the mention of the Premier League made Eriksson almost giddy. He told reporters that he and the mercurial Russian owner of Chelsea, Roman Abramovich, were good friends.

“He has my phone number if he wants it,” Eriksson said. “And let me assure you, he has not called me.”

For the moment, Eriksson has one of the more shaky jobs in North America, coaching Mexico, in a World Cup qualifier, far north of the border, where the forecast includes Landon Donovan and Tim Howard, thunderstorms and gusts.

