Lebron James said he did not feel the need to match Kobe Bryant’s 61 points of two nights earlier, but he almost could not help himself Wednesday night.

On one of his periodic inspections of a potential home court — and praising that hallowed arena every chance he got — James scored 52 points of his own in a 107-102 victory over the Knicks.

James can become a free agent in the summer of 2010, and just may be casing the joint every time he visits Madison Square Garden. One thing he has noticed is the Garden fans’ willingness to cheer for an opponent who is having a brilliant night, the way they did for Bryant on Monday, or the way they did when James scored 50 last March.

On Wednesday, James achieved a triple-double with a rebound on the last tick of the clock, making him the first player to have double-digit rebounds and assists to go with at least 50 points since Kareem Abdul-Jabbar did it 33 years ago. Kareem never made it to the Garden as a home-team player, but James could have that option. 

It would be understandable if James had been accompanied by his agent, his real estate adviser and his feng shui consultant, if he insisted that he would need warmer earth tones for the interior if he were to play here. In the rebuilt Garden of the future, he may demand a more grand public entrance and ask that management do something about the narrow corridor outside the home locker room. It is impossible for the human spirit to soar if imprisoned in such grim surroundings. 

And it would be reasonable of him to ask whether the Knicks were really serious about letting David Lee get away. Who’s going to do all the dirty work?

Instead of making demands, James just took what he was given by the Knicks, mainly the opportunity to freelance against a vast variety of the Knicks’ bigger men. He is already a known quantity — a 6-foot-8 behemoth apparently even bigger than his listed 250 pounds, with a better jump shot than ever. And he can become a free agent in 17 months. But he insisted he had only one point to prove Wednesday.

“Kobe Bryant’s performance was unbelievable,” James said after Wednesday’s game. “And they won the basketball game. The biggest thing was that we won this game.”

He showed his respect for the Garden before and after the game, referring to it as “the Mecca of basketball,” and raving about the fans, the atmosphere, the history. He said he understood how fans could cheer both for the home team and for a visiting player having an exceptional night. 

The fans cheered for the Knicks as they kept it close, with Al Harrington scoring 39 points of his own, but James was the attraction. This was the middle of what must be ratings week in the N.B.A., what with Kobe, LeBron and the defending champion Celtics coming to the Garden within five nights. Somebody in the N.B.A. knows how to fight off the February blahs. 

Everybody in the Garden knew the subplot. “July 1 of 2010 is a very big day,” James said recently. “It’s probably going to be one of the biggest days in free-agent history in the N.B.A.”

Other stars may become available on that magic day of contract liberation, including Dwyane Wade of Miami and Chris Bosh of Toronto, but James seems to be the reason the Knicks are cutting back on their payroll, so they can fit a superstar into their salary cap.

“That’s the business side of the game,” James said before Wednesday’s game. If he were running a team, he said, he might trim the payroll to build for the future. But, he added, “You don’t want to crash the season you have.”

The Knicks’ payroll machinations are rendering the current season essentially a way station to the future, which is too bad. Mike D’Antoni has done a good job of coaching this collection of willing office temps, as opposed to the chaos of the Larry Brown-Isiah Thomas years. 

With potential free agency approaching, James must perform his part of the mating dance, feinting left, faking right, saying he may leave Cleveland, or he may stay. He just may see the fun in leading his home region, northern Ohio, to a championship. A man who has learned a few business tricks from Warren Buffett, James knows he could make an extra $31 million by staying with the Cavaliers, under the complicated rules of the salary cap. 

James showed his strength Wednesday, playing 44 minutes, including the last six favoring his left leg, after he had to go out of the game briefly because of what he said was dehydration and cramps. The fans could only admire his talent, his size, his strength, his stability — and they could dream about what it would be like if he were really swayed by the legacy of the Garden. 

