We are gathered here for the annual State of the Dixie Cup lecture to be delivered this year by Alex Rodriguez, renowned expert on waffling about the unknown substances he put into his system earlier in this decade.

On Tuesday at 1:30 p.m., under the big tent, in the main ring, Rodriguez will replicate the address given by Andy Pettitte a year ago, detailing his brief and, of course, totally uncharacteristic foray into the wonderful world of performance-enhancing substances.

Perhaps Rodriguez will give a nonspecific apology, as offered by Jason Giambi in a non-tent performance at Yankee Stadium in February 2005.

Daddy, is this what they mean by Yankee tradition?

As we wait for Rodriguez, members of the news media bludgeon one another with the padded mallets players used to soften their new gloves for our failure to document instances of drug use by major league players of the past generation.

Many readers accuse the news media of covering up, as if we had been invited guests when José Canseco and Mark McGwire slipped into a bathroom stall to shoot each other full of steroids (at least in Canseco’s literary version of the truth).

What didn’t we know and when didn’t we know it? This is the question. Was it the first time we saw Lenny Dykstra one spring and wondered where his neck had gone? Was it the day we noticed new and larger ball caps being broken in under recently enlarged heads? Why were we not clairvoyant? Why didn’t players just run up to us and confess out of sheer racking guilt? Why don’t we have subpoena powers? Fortunately, wiser and more influential persons have also struggled to understand the murky world of drugs. This was brought home the other day when I read an essay by the former attorney general, Richard L. Thornburgh, now practicing law in Washington.

Thornburgh recalled a visit in 1989 from his fellow Yale University alumnus, Bart Giamatti, at the time the commissioner of baseball. Thornburgh had just argued and won a case in the Supreme Court, Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Assoc., involving the right of a transportation company to impose drug testing on employees involved in accidents, and Giamatti wanted to know more about the legal issues involving drug testing.

“Steroids had not emerged as an issue then, but there had been a trial out here,” Thornburgh said, referring to his home near Pittsburgh, the site of a cocaine trial in 1985 involving many major leaguers. Peter Ueberroth, who preceded Giamatti as commissioner, had called for universal mandatory testing, but he got nowhere.

In 1989, Thornburgh said he tried to find common ground between the Supreme Court case and baseball, but as he wrote in his essay: “It was clear that Bart was deeply troubled by what he saw as firm opposition in important quarters to the notion of testing major leaguers for using illegal substances. He left my office with a decidedly pessimistic view of what he obviously felt deeply to be a serious threat to the integrity of the national pastime.”

Thornburgh added that he never saw his friend again, because Giamatti died of a heart attack at 51 on Sept. 1, 1989, after dealing with the Pete Rose gambling case. Thornburgh said he could only speculate whether Giamatti could have marshaled a case for testing players much sooner. 

“Maybe he would have gone down,” Thornburgh said. “But he would have gone down nobly.”

The speculation by Thornburgh was dismissed by Fay Vincent, a close friend of Giamatti who succeeded him as the commissioner. Now retired in Florida, Vincent said in a telephone interview: “We didn’t know anything about steroids. We heard about José Canseco, but we thought it was a football thing. The issue was cocaine in those days.”

However, in 1991, Vincent noted, he banned steroids by name after they were added to a federal law banning certain drugs. “A lawyer said, ‘You should ban it as a moral issue,’ ” Vincent recalled. “There was no downside to it. I’m glad I did it.” Then Vincent added, “Without collective bargaining, it was meaningless,” because he could not enforce any ban without having access to testing and penalties through a negotiated contract.

“It was a non-event,” Vincent said. “Had I seen it coming, what could I have done? I could have used the bully pulpit. But if you were to chart it, you would find it sometime in the late ’90s.”

Vincent resigned in 1992, but baseball made another attempt at widespread testing in 1994 under Bud Selig. Rob Manfred, then an outside counsel and now the executive vice president for labor relations of Major League Baseball, wrote a 12-page proposal, “Prevention of Drug Use and Distribution.” The proposal included testing for “steroids or prescription drugs which the Player uses or possesses without a valid prescription.” Manfred’s proposal was scuttled by the labor stoppage that terminated the 1994 season, and it never surfaced again.

Neither Vincent nor Selig used the bully pulpit to raise awareness about steroids, not even whispering about it in back channels. After McGwire was discovered to be using an over-the-counter form of steroid, banned by most sports, in 1998, reporters slowly began to ask questions. The players association fought off the concept as a violation of privacy. It took a direct threat from Congress before the owners and the union raised testing and penalties to the current level — and there are still questions about whether Rodriguez was warned about drug tests.

And now, if you will excuse me, it’s my turn with the mallet.

