We all remember the team of our childhood, the first team we loved.

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger can look back seven decades at the team from a Bavarian town named Fürth, “which in those days was like the Green Bay Packers,” he said in his distinctive accent, known all over the world. 

Like the Packers of American football fame, Fürth produced powerhouse soccer teams that won the German championship. 

“When the Nazis came in,” Kissinger continued, “for anybody of Jewish origin to go to any crowded place was a risk.” It was especially dangerous for teenagers, he said. “Kids would beat you up.”

He paused and added: “I went anyway. There was no rational reason for it.”

His family got out in time, in 1938, and soon he was watching Joe DiMaggio from the Yankee Stadium bleachers, but Fürth was always his first team. 

“They are sort of like the Brooklyn Dodgers used to be,” he said, somewhat gloomily. “They nearly make it, but never quite make it,” he said.

He makes baseball comparisons as a knowledgeable American, and now he is undertaking a soccer mission for the nation that gave him shelter. He has joined the committee that is seeking to bring the World Cup of soccer to the United States in 2018 or 2022.

“I will be 99 years old,” he said in his deliberate style, referring to 2022. “I have sort of a moral obligation to stay around.”

Well, why not? Octogenarian Cubs fans keep going in the hope of seeing a World Series in Wrigley Field. Boston Bruins fans dream of one more Stanley Cup sometime in this century. Knicks fans? Well, never mind.

In a news conference Monday, Kissinger stressed how the World Cup drew record crowds in the United States. But there is a geopolitical drawback to American hopes: the international soccer federation, known as FIFA, has committed to placing the quadrennial tournament around the globe — first in South Africa in 2010, then in Brazil in 2014.

Ever the realist, Kissinger suggested that Europe would somehow snag the 2018 Cup but that the United States could win for 2022. Both hosts will be chosen at the end of 2010.

FIFA, powerful and secretive, has often treated the United States like a distant relative, perhaps because the United States has not emerged as a major soccer power. Ranked 17th in the world, the United States is improving by increments. On Saturday night in El Salvador, in a World Cup qualifying match, the United States fell behind, 2-0, but rallied behind a frenzied older defender, Frankie Hejduk, to gain a 2-2 draw, one of the best comebacks in American history.

The United States has Major League Soccer, growing sanely and drawing an average of 16,000 fans a game, and last weekend the new Women’s Professional Soccer league began play, hoping to catch up to the spectacular Women’s World Cup of 1999. 

No doubt Kissinger will emphasize all this as he schmoozes his numerous contacts all over the world. To some, he is remembered as the American official who prolonged the war in Vietnam; to others he is remembered for winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973. 

But he is also known to be a soccer buff, who has seen every World Cup but one starting in 1974 and who helped talk Pelé into joining the New York Cosmos in the false spring of the 1970s. 

On Monday he recalled that whenever he went to Europe as Secretary of State, his handlers would come up with free time on Saturday, and tickets to a key match. He became a fan of Juventus of Turin because of his friendship with the owner, Gianni Agnelli of Fiat. And he said he liked two teams in England, Manchester United and Arsenal, a duality unimaginable to any English fan. 

In international play, he praised the varying styles of several countries, saying: “Nobody would mistake a Brazilian team for a German team. The French teams are always the most elegant team in Europe.” He confessed to not loving the defensive Italian style — “Say it in a kind way, will you?” he asked reporters — but added that the Italians were masters at throwing opponents off their game. Diplomatically, he said he did not think the United States had exactly found its style yet.

Although he praised the complicated modern democracy of Germany, he dryly noted, “You know, my experiences in Germany were not that great.” He added, “I follow them, I wish them well, but I don’t feel about them the way I do the Yankees.”

He does keep up with Fürth, currently in second place in the German second division, which would qualify it for the top level of the Bundesliga next year. Somebody in Fürth sent him a jersey, but Kissinger says he does not wear it.

“I don’t know why the hell I should care,” he mused. “This town that I left 70 years ago, why I should care, but I do.”

He cares because nobody moved the team to Los Angeles, because nobody shut it down. It is still there, in the second division maybe, but also in Henry Kissinger’s worldly old heart.

