As he came to work in this auspicious time in America, Quentin Richardson recalled the anger of his grandmother many years ago. 
 
His older cousin had neglected to vote, back home in Chicago, and Ada Cox was letting him know about it.

“She was a mild-tempered lady and we didn’t understand why she was upset,” Richardson recalled Monday before the Knicks outlasted the Bulls, 102-98, in the annual Martin Luther King matinee at Madison Square Garden. 

Thoughtful as he described his grandmother an hour before the game, Richardson was poised and accurate during the game, making 5 of 6 shots from 3-point range to lead all scorers with 24 points. 

Both teams paid full attention to their jobs, but they were well aware that it was Dr. King’s birthday and the day before Barack Obama’s inauguration. Dr. King’s somber visage and an upbeat Obama image were flashed on the message board during the game, as if people needed a reminder of the awesome overlap of these two days. 

Several Knicks stressed that their pride was not only as blacks but also as Americans. The hope for intelligence and competence and trustworthiness is hardly a racial or ethnic issue. But nobody can miss the personal fulfillment on the faces on the Mall in Washington.

“It never crossed my mind that this would happen in my lifetime,” said Richardson, who is approaching 29.

There is no way young people can viscerally feel what it was like in the days of segregation and outright racial hostility, but Richardson and his teammates have heard enough to know what the world was like for their parents and grandparents.

Richardson’s grandmother, who died when he was 12, sometimes talked about how hard it was for her when she was young. Even in Chicago, he said, there were times and places “she couldn’t use the same bathroom” as white people, until the civil rights era.

“A lot of people fought and died for those rights,” Richardson said.

These thoughts were crossing a lot of minds on the annual holiday when the Knicks always play at home to make the sport accessible to children in a matinee atmosphere.

“This is fun, you can’t consider it work,” said Tim Thomas, who grew up in Paterson, N.J. “This is one of the best jobs in the world. Now we get to play on the day before the first African-American president. What more can you ask for?”

Thomas volunteered that he was not only impressed with the new president but also with his wife, Michelle Obama, the lawyer and mother who is a presence when she and her husband are interviewed. 

“Anybody who has a wife would be interested in the first African-American first lady, too,” Thomas said.

One of the Knicks had a more personal insight into the 44th president of the United States. Chris Duhon played against Obama back in Chicago, where Duhon used to play for the Bulls. 

Reggie Love, a reserve forward and Duhon’s teammate on the Duke 2001 national championship team, is Obama’s personal assistant, rarely more than a step away. Duhon said he speaks every day to Love, who was also a star football lineman at Duke. 

“I’m proud of him,” Duhon said of Love. “He’s worked hard for what he has.” He added that Love had been a political science major and would like to be governor of North Carolina one day. In these days, anything seems possible.

Duhon sized up Obama on the court over the last two years when the senator from Illinois was already an announced candidate. 

“We’re all playing the game,” Duhon said. “We don’t take it easy on anybody.” Asked for an assessment of Obama’s game, Duhon said: “He’s all right. Solid, point-guard type. Decent.”

Coming from a professional, that word was high praise. Then Duhon added: “On the court, he’s vocal. He understands the game, shows what he’s like at work. He wants people to be communicating.”

Duhon’s back was so stiff before the game that there was a possibility he might not play, but he gritted out 19 points in nearly 34 minutes. He passed up an invitation to the inauguration, saying, “My focus is to help the Knicks make the playoffs.” 

There was at least a buzz in the Garden, part of it from Danilo Gallinari, the Italian import, who is healthier each game. The sound system played a few chords of the timeless song “Volare.” At one point, Gallinari guarded Andres Nocioni from Argentina; in what language do they trash-talk? And playing for the Bulls were Luol Deng, originally from the Sudan, and Joakim Noah, with his roots in Cameroon, France, Sweden and the United States. 

But the core of the sport is still dominated by African-American players, with their own take on the new point guard in the White House.

Richardson said he would definitely find a way to catch up with the inauguration, even if the Knicks are practicing in the late morning on Tuesday. 

“Millions of people are talking about it,” he said. “Unbelievable.

“If my grandmother was here, she’d be crying.”

