The National Hockey League has done something I never thought possible. It has stolen New Year’s Day. 

The first day of the year used to be a daylong celebration of foo’ball in warm places, but the Bowl Championship Series has made other bowl games virtually irrelevant, leaving the day open for wiser heads. 

The N.H.L. has played carpe diem by giving us steambreath under a gray sky, the exact opposite of the traditional appeal of sun-dappled bowl games.

I am referring to last Thursday’s outdoor game between two ancient franchises, the Detroit Red Wings and the Chicago Blackhawks, played at Chicago’s Wrigley Field. It was a spectacle bigger than the sum of its parts. One did not have to understand the rules for icing the puck to appreciate a ballpark full of 40,000 bundled-up fans screaming for nearly three hours as two crack teams went at each other.

Boys will be boys. I loved the moment when Detroit’s Daniel Cleary was dumped skates-over-teakettle into the Chicago bench, and the lads hooked their mitts into his gear to keep him from rejoining the fray. The normal shenanigans of any mundane night across North America from October through March became epic in the frigid confines of Wrigley. 

Of course, some of us love hockey not just for its ferocity and skill but for its underlying code of civility off the ice. The sport was already looking good on Nov. 23, when the Blackhawks’ players chose to give up a day at home to make a detour from Toronto for the wake of the father of their general manager, Dale Tallon, in a tiny Ontario town two hours away. 

Not that the players made that journey out of self-interest, but there may be a moral to the fact that mostly good things have followed the Blackhawks ever since. The league needs a presence from its six “original” franchises in order to preserve the culture of the sport. 

This was the third outdoor game for the N.H.L. in recent years, starting with Montreal at Edmonton in 2003 and then moving to a Winter Classic on Jan. 1, 2008, putting Pittsburgh in snowy Orchard Park, N.Y., outside Buffalo. This year, the league went for total tradition, putting elders like Bobby Hull and Ted Lindsay and baseball’s Ferguson Jenkins in the same ballpark.

Part of the appeal, of course, came from the juxtaposition with historic Wrigley, borrowing another sport’s glamour. If so, let’s have more of it — Fenway Park or the new version of Yankee Stadium. And what about historic Quebec City, with the Plains of Abraham in the background?

The league has its problems with the economy and incursions from soccer and Nascar and golf and all the rest. But the N.H.L. has now established a once-a-year spectacle.

Sometimes, sport is just plain pleasing to the eye, like watching La Belle France flit by on television during the Tour de France. I can do that for hours. By claiming the first day of the new year, hockey has created a grand new tradition akin to Breakfast at Wimbledon back when NBC had the courage to display Bud Collins in those amazing strawberry-and-cream slacks. 

The early afternoon hockey game made me glad I had fallen asleep right after midnight with nothing unhealthy in my system. Aerial shots showed the elevated train gliding prosaically just outside Wrigley, with the stunning skyline of wintry Chicago (what a place for the Summer Games) glittering just to the south and the east. I also liked the shots of some players clumping their way down the steep steps from the clubhouse to the runway to the dugout. I loved the warm-ups with bright sweaters and ski caps and the cowboy hats on the Red Wings’ coaches. Nice touch.

I asked Frank Brown, the N.H.L.’s vice president for media relations, and formerly a writer, and a knowledgeable one at that, about the sport, what the highlight had been for him. He had wondered if the 80,000 hands and 40,000 larynxes could produce a din equal to the anthem in the old Chicago Stadium, where he covered 50 or more games. 

“It gave me chills every time,” Brown recalled, adding that the roar at Wrigley lived up to his hopes. The game was pretty neat, too, with the Red Wings winning, 6-4, showing their poise and skill from their European transfusion of the past generation. 

With NBC and Bob Costas providing the gravitas it deserved, the game earned an overnight rating of 2.9 with a 6 share, the best rating for a regular-season N.H.L. game in nearly 13 years. 

Now the N.H.L lunges onward with a full half of its season remaining. On Monday night, I put myself in Madison Square Garden to watch the Rangers take on the Penguins, whose Sidney Crosby and Evgeni Malkin are supposed to be the Gretzky and Messier of this generation.

However, the Penguins, the Stanley Cup runners-up, continued to play in an inexplicable funk Monday, as the Rangers outplayed them all the way, surviving a 5-on-3 disadvantage for 1 minute 58 seconds early in the game and scoring a 4-0 victory. The Rangers seized the night, the way the N.H.L. has seized New Year’s Day.

