Before the earthquake, before life changed, Mu Zijian followed the career of Yao Ming back in Sichuan Province. 

“He gives us confidence,” Mu said. “He was the only yellow man in the N.B.A., the only Asian. The league is mostly African-American, and he showed us that an Asian man can play there, too.”

Watching Yao’s games meant working around morning classes at Sichuan University in Chengdu, since China is on the other side of the world from the N.B.A.’s time zones. But Mu would find a way to watch games and monitor Yao’s public image, too. 

“I love Yao Ming,” Mu said. “He’s humorous, he tells jokes better now. He’s a very good person. He’s a very good symbol.”

On Monday, Mu Zijian met Yao Ming, the 7-foot-6 center of the Houston Rockets, the very tall face of modern, outward-facing China. It was a meeting both would have avoided with every bit of their wills. They met only in the aftermath of the horrendous earthquake on May 12 in Sichuan, which killed as many as 10,000 people, many of them children inside their crumbling schools.

“At first, you were excited, but after that, you were so scared,” Mu said, recalling the damage to his college. His English has become quite good since September, when he and 149 other students from Sichuan began a year of study with the State University of New York, in a program called SUNY China 150. 

On Monday, Mu recalled the first hours, trying to call his home in the county of Beichuan, near the epicenter of the earthquake. “You call your family but you can’t get through,” Mu said. “Every phone line is dark.” Ultimately, the students learned that almost all of them had suffered terrible losses.

“Eighteen relatives,” Mu said. “My grandfather, my little brother. I was kind of lucky because both my parents are alive. Many of my friends lost parents. One of my friends had 25 people die.”

This dreadful event united Yao and Mu and 19 other Chinese students in a downtown hotel on Monday. With the Statue of Liberty raising her torch out in the harbor, Yao and the 20 students wished one another a happier new year and talked about improving life back in Sichuan.

Yao was in town with the Rockets, nursing knee discomfort that kept him out of Monday night’s game with the Knicks. But he showed no distress as he ducked his head beneath the doorway of a hotel meeting room to sit in a circle with 20 students selected from the diaspora of Sichuan students placed from Farmingdale to Plattsburgh, from New Paltz to Buffalo.

The students were selected after Gov. David A. Paterson made a trip to New York’s Chinatown to learn about the earthquake in May — and then committed the state’s university system to further improve its long contact with China. George Hu, an adviser to the governor, recalled elderly residents of Chinatown, most of them from Fujian Province, donating hard-earned $20 bills for the people from Sichuan. 

Yao donated $2 million through his foundation to help rebuild Sichuan. He was under tremendous pressure, as he rehabilitated the foot he fractured last February, to represent his homeland at the Summer Games in Beijing. Afterward, he toured Sichuan: “Ten times worse than I expected,” he said Monday. “Shocking.”

In a meeting with Yao, monitored by Wei Lin, the director of China programs for SUNY, the students displayed the same openness that all of us felt from the young volunteers of Beijing last summer. 

The students — who are committed to returning to Sichuan after two semesters — variously described themselves as 150 bridges from New York to Sichuan, 150 volunteers, 150 branches of one tree.

They did not hold back. Mu, who is from the Qiang ethnic group, one of the minorities of China, suggested to Yao that Qiang studies be emphasized in rebuilt Sichuan. Yao, from proud seaside Shanghai, nodded solemnly and said it was a good idea. One young woman expressed hope that a destroyed village once again be the center of traditional art, but Yao emphasized that art should be individual, not mass-produced. They invited him to invest his money and care on their towns. He seemed to note every request.

Yao seemed invigorated by this meeting. Because of his great height, he left school in the seventh grade to join a training center where academics were not emphasized. His parents, both members of national teams, had been matched in matrimony, essentially in the hopes they would produce just such a child. This is described in the book, “Operation Yao Ming: The Chinese Sports Empire, American Big Business, and the Making of an N.B.A. Superstar,” written by Brook Larmer for Gotham Books in 2005. His mother was an aggressive member of the Red Guards during the revolution.

“Their energy,” he said of the students as he headed toward a Rockets team meeting. “They are so smart. Amazing ideas. They have such a bright future. They will help change the world.”

He knew these young people were in New York only because of tragedy. He seemed to know just how lucky he has been. He seemed to be seeing himself, as he might have been if he had been two feet shorter. They will be their own bridges, with the help of New York State, on the other side of the world.

