The wives already know the dangers from football. The wives are the ones who manage their husbands when they spin out of control, who feed them and dress them and clean them and do the paperwork and ultimately find nursing care for them.

So the wives do not need a primer in care for players with advancing dementia. They could give the course — when they are allowed to be heard, that is.

It looked bad last Thursday night when Eleanor Perfetto, the wife of Ralph Wenzel, a former N.F.L. player, showed up at a meeting of former players in Bethesda, Md. It all looked very clubby, very private and very male. 

But at least the nasty subject of dementia in the N.F.L. is being discussed. Commissioner Roger Goodell, who accepted an invitation to the meeting from the players, wants to hear from the wives. So does Harry Carson, a leader of the retired players, who nevertheless reserve their right to the tradition of closed-door meetings. 

“My whole purpose is to speak for the players who cannot speak for themselves,” Perfetto said Monday. “There will be a biased point of view if only the healthy ones show up.”

It sounded bad, the way Carson, the Hall of Fame linebacker and one of the finest people in his sport, said: “If there’s a woman in the room, I have to watch what I say. Maybe we need to go back and make an exception for her and the wives of players with dementia. But then again, men are men and they’ll look at that woman and will not say everything they want to say in the manner they want to say it.”

In reality, nobody else was allowed in — not agents, lawyers, family members or friends of either sex.

“We sort of dropped the ball,” Carson explained Monday. “I urged the commissioner to go out and meet the guys. We likened it to a team meeting. Sometimes we used to have closed-door meetings with the Giants. In our exuberance that the commissioner was going to do it, we forgot about the caregivers. They took it literally, and we should have made it known.”

Carson, who sustained numerous concussions as a player, said he wanted to explain to Perfetto and Sylvia Mackey, two wives who have been eloquent witnesses to dementia among former players, as described by Alan Schwarz in The New York Times over the past two years.

Perfetto, a senior director in health policy issues for Pfizer, has been an advocate for Wenzel, now in a nursing home in Maryland. Mackey works as a flight attendant to support her husband, John, the Hall of Fame tight end with the Baltimore Colts and a leader in the players union, who has been in assisted living since September.

“It sounds old school to me,” Mackey said Monday about the meeting. She added, “Trust me, there’s nothing they could say that we haven’t heard before.”

Is there a positive side to the private meeting?

“Men typically do not like to talk about their disabilities in front of women, feeling it will disempower them,” said Connie Glaser of Atlanta, an expert on the ways men and women express themselves and author of “GenderTalk Works,” published in 2007 by Windsor Hall Press. 

In a telephone interview Monday, Glaser said that without women in the room, men might use stronger language and be more honest about sexuality, incontinence and disorientation.

“They might be afraid their wives will say, ‘Hand over the car keys,’ ” said Glaser, who then urged that the older players listen to the wives. “They are caregivers. Excluding them is counterproductive.” 

Greg Aiello, the spokesman for the N.F.L., said Monday that Goodell had agreed to listen to the former players but that he also planned to listen to the wives. 

Carson said, “Goodell has done more in two years than was done in the last 20 years.” 

The N.F.L. was slow to recognize dementia, violence and death among its players, but recently, autopsies of five players who died young showed signs of dementia stemming from concussions. 

The neglect reminded me of covering Appalachia in the early ’70s — the coal industry came up with doctors who insisted coal dust wasn’t so bad. Heck, they said, it might even be a cure for the common cold. Then I ran into a maverick physician from West Virginia who carried around a post-mortem slide of a miner’s lung, which showed the grime and damage from pneumoconiosis, or black lung disease. That cured me of trusting industry medical experts.

The N.F.L. is financing a study on brain damage, with findings expected by 2010. In recent seasons the league has also directed team medical staffs not to allow players back into a game if they have been knocked unconscious. In an act long overdue, the league put doctors with extensive neurological credentials in charge of the brain-damage study.

In the past two years the league has established the 88 Plan (in honor of Mackey’s uniform number), which pays up to $88,000 a year for players with dementia who are in nursing homes. Ninety-seven former players are receiving help, with many thousands apparently not needing care — “at the moment,” Mackey said. 

“But they don’t know about the future,” she added. 

The aging players need to talk honestly among themselves, but they also need to listen to loyal wives like Perfetto and Mackey, who stuck around when their large and energetic husbands began to break down. 

