Bob Hamman is doomed to be remembered as the businessman who lost a $7.5 million settlement to Lance Armstrong. But Hamman is not used to losing and could even make the case that he has won more championships than Mr. Lance himself. 

Both are giants in competitions that require an iron will and an iron rear end. While Armstrong won the Tour de France seven straight times from 1999 through 2005 — and is talking of trying the Tour again next summer — Hamman has won 11 world championships and dozens of other major titles in the niche sport called contract bridge. 

The two are probably more alike than they would have acknowledged during their legal joust three years ago.

“After a competition, you and your opponents may not be the best of buddies because somebody has won and somebody has lost,” Hamman said the other day. 

Armstrong, who has glared foes and teammates into submission, would probably agree with Hamman’s view of the world: “Competition is an innocent framework for carrying out one’s aggressions.” And hardly anybody dies, he adds.

Hamman, 70, was in New York on Thursday after a recent championship in Boston. He is still smarting over the 2006 case that forced him to pay Armstrong $5 million in prize money, plus $2.5 million in interest and fees. 

They became a pair for the ages — the Ali and Frazier of sports law — after Armstrong and his people engaged Hamman’s company, SCA Promotions of Dallas, which calls itself “an international marketing service firm specializing in Promotional Risk Coverage and Technology Solutions for Sweepstakes and Games,” including hole-in-one events, sports and media contests, sales and consumer product promotions. 

Hamman’s company paid Armstrong $1.5 million for winning the 2002 Tour and another $3 million for 2003, but balked at $5 million when Armstrong won the 2004 Tour. Hamman said he became suspicious that Armstrong might have used performance-enhancing drugs upon the publication of a book by David Walsh and Pierre Ballester, “L.A. Confidentiel,” which has never been published in English.

Armstrong, who has never had an official positive test, and has denied using performance-enhancing substances, went to court for the $5 million. Without ruling on the testimony, a three-person arbitration board ruled that Hamman’s company had been in the insurance business for the purposes of that wager. With a lifetime of reading the cards, Hamman decided the odds were 100-0 against him.

“It’s over,” Armstrong said at the time. “We won. They lost. I was yet again completely vindicated.” 

A charismatic icon to fellow cancer patients, Armstrong is now hiring his own drug-testing service for his comeback starting in January in Australia. 

Hamman now believes he should have regarded the $5 million contract as being less with the team’s sponsor at the time, the United States Postal Service, and more as an athlete’s wager on himself. But he shrugs and adds: “It’s the nature of life. It goes with the territory.” 

While Armstrong is making an athletic comeback, Hamman has not gone away. A native of California, he spent a year at Occidental College (also the first college of Barack Obama) but found himself drawn to the campus card room and never accumulated many credits. In 1969, he was recruited to Dallas by Ira Corn, a financier who was assembling an American dream team of bridge, the Aces. 

For several decades he was paired with Bobby Wolff. “Wolffie and I have been playing at the top level for a long time, and we live off being battle-scarred veterans who manage to hate our opponents slightly more than we hate each other,” Hamman told The New York Times in 1987.

The Aces outlasted the world power, Italian Blue, which was abruptly disbanded after suspicions of dishonesty. 

“The existence of cheating can probably be established just by reviewing the hands that were played,” Hamman said Thursday, noting that a questionable competitor can be seen “taking unusual actions only when they work, establishing a statistical footprint.” He thinks some sports — baseball and cycling, most notably — were slow to police drug cheating.

A heavyset man with gray hair, Hamman exudes dogged persistence. He has learned not to drink alcohol or eat a meal before competition, having watched older competitors fade.

In 2003, Hamman participated in one of the epic collapses in any sport, during the Bermuda Bowl in Monaco. Paired with Paul Soloway, a heart patient with limited endurance, he watched the renowned Lorenzo Lauria touch the wrong card at a crucial moment, which everyone knew at once was a costly mistake. Faced with overtime at best, Hamman’s team beat the Italians, 304-303. 

“He was getting tired, you could see it,” Hamman said of Lauria. (Soloway died a year ago.) 

That collapse was akin to the brain lock displayed by Zinédine Zidane of France, who delivered a vicious head butt to a taunting Italian rival in front of the world’s eyes during the 2006 World Cup soccer final in Berlin. Without the banished Zidane, France lost in the shootout.

“We had a stake in that game,” Hamman noted Thursday. Having underwritten a French victory for a business client, Hamman was watching Zidane’s head butt from his office in Dallas. Zidane’s costly escapade was part of doing business, just as the Armstrong case was. 

They go their separate ways, Armstrong pedaling, Hamman bidding, linked as winner and loser in public memory, rather than as two champions of their own worlds who once found a way to compete.

