As soon as Matt Gilroy hustled himself into the last available hockey jersey at Boston University, he requested the flamboyant No. 97.

This was simply not done in the Auerbachian reign of Coach Jack Parker. Players were not allowed the flair of a Wayne Gretzky 99 or a Jaromir Jagr 68 or a Sidney Crosby 87. 

The Terriers were winning their national titles and Beanpot championships without any cult of the individual. Their highest jersey number was 35.

But there was a story behind the request by the new player: In the hours after his brother Timmy died after a bicycle accident short of his eighth birthday, Matt Gilroy vowed to wear Timmy’s No. 97 for the rest of his life. 

Fortunately, Matt had a patron, the assistant coach Mike Bavis. Four years earlier, Bavis’s twin brother, Mark, who had played alongside him at Boston University, had died on one of the planes hijacked on Sept. 11, 2001. 

If there was anybody who understood what Matt wanted, it was Mike Bavis. Bavis relayed Gilroy’s request to Parker, the lifer coach who has amassed 36 seasons and 797 victories as of Thursday and pointedly warns hotshot freshmen that they have but a 5 percent chance of making the National Hockey League. 

The new guy, whom Parker barely knew, wanted to wear 97? Never. But Bavis persisted. The greatest coaches are, in their own ways, adaptable, and in the end Parker said yes.

“In reality, I was discouraging him — and he came anyway,” Parker said, recalling how Gilroy agreed to switch from forward to defense and to spend his first year as a practice player. Gilroy looked so good in an exhibition, however, that he earned a spot on the team. He is now a two-time all-American defenseman, a senior captain and a preliminary candidate for the annual Hobey Baker Award, given to the best college player. 

Because he took such a long route, with two years of junior hockey, Gilroy will turn 25 in September. Now 6 feet 2 inches and 205 pounds, Gilroy is very much a late bloomer. 

“When he was 18, he wasn’t shaving,” his father, Frank Gilroy, said the other day. “He was 5-7, 145. You can’t fight genetics.”

At that age, Matt was 11 inches shorter than his father, a member of the St. John’s basketball Hall of Fame who has done well on Wall Street. The family had a nice house in North Bellmore, N.Y., and the children were encouraged to play whatever sport they liked.

Timmy and Matt, who was 13 months older, chose Nos. 97 and 98 on their youth hockey jerseys, in homage to the Great One. 

In August 1993, Timmy fell off his bicycle, rushing to play in a neighborhood game. He died of brain injuries a few days later. His mother, PeggyAnn, remembers Matt lying in bed that night, crying and vowing to honor his brother. 

“Timmy would have done great things,” Matt said the other day. “You can’t predict what.” Timmy needed to be remembered, Matt told his mother, vowing to wear No. 97 whenever he could. When that number was not possible, Matt wore 9 or 7, and his mother would sew a No. 97 patch inside Matt’s jersey, to get Timmy completely into the game. 

The father did not push his children into his sport. The oldest boy, Frank Jr., played basketball for St. Mary’s High School and St. Anselm College. (“That’s why he’s Dad’s favorite,” Matt said the other day, his smirk coming through over the phone.) 

Rink culture was as fanatic as schoolyard culture, Frank discovered. He learned his sport in the schoolyard of P.S. 32 in Flushing, Queens, where the older players taught the younger ones how to box out, how to give and go. A generation later, in a suburban county to the east, he saw some of his children gravitate to the sport made popular by the four-time Stanley Cup champion Islanders. 

Sometimes PeggyAnn performed the hockey mom details, including driving to distant rinks, across bridges, so children could get 12 minutes of playing time. The first time she had to dress Matt and Timmy, she placed the shin guards and protective cup outside their uniforms. How was she to know? Now, it’s a family legend. 

One day at the rink, Frank Gilroy spotted another willowy hockey dad — Billy Schaeffer, a great shooter at St. John’s from 1969 to 1973 and a three-year professional, escorting his son, Kevin (who would later be a teammate of Matt’s for two years at B.U.). 

The two fathers even played for a while in an over-35 hockey game. “It was quite a sight, these two giants,” PeggyAnn reported. “They were pretty good.”

Recently, Frank took a break from his Wall Street job — he was in the last subway train stalled beneath the World Trade Center on 9/11 — and the family moved to Sudbury, Mass., so they could watch Matt and his younger brother Kevin, 21, together at B.U. this season.

Coach Parker tried to convince Matt to take one of the 23 offers from the N.H.L. after last season.

“I knew he would earn his degree, but his mother said, ‘You don’t understand, those are his classmates,’ ” Parker said. “They should have 40 children, that’s the kind of family it is.” (The Gilroys have eight surviving children, ages 9 through 26, not counting Timmy and another son who died shortly after birth.)

“There will be a reward for him,” Parker said of his walk-on with the unusual number. If the N.H.L. works out, Matt Gilroy will surely request Timmy’s No. 97, just as he promised, lying on his bed, the night his brother died.

