No matter what comes later — say, in the last week of the season, that recent and ghastly Mets tradition — there could only be one first game, when the gates open and the people enter.
 
Keep up with the latest news on The Times’s baseball blog.

This was not opening day, when the games count. This was not even the first Mets exhibition, which is Friday against the Red Sox. But it was the first real game of baseball, St. John’s against Georgetown, and the real star of the day was the new ballpark.

It is handsome and functional and full of nooks and crannies to explore. The Wilpon family knew what it was doing. This is not the municipal dump that used to be next door. If anybody had dared to play “There Used to Be a Ballpark,” that Sinatra chestnut, I would have laughed out loud. 

The new place opened on a misty Sunday in very early spring. As damp as the weather was, it was hard to extricate the hope of spring from the rush of a new baseball season from the curiosity about a new ballpark, where many things will happen, some of them joyous, some of them dreadful.

Suspend for a day the rightful thumb-sucking about whether any of this largesse is good for the general population. This is, after all, a project that cost approximately $800 million, not including the extras tossed in by the city and the tax breaks and all that murky stuff. 

Suspend for a day that the name of the field is currently Citi Field, named for a banking company that has pledged $400 million over 20 years in naming rights while pocketing a gigantic bailout from the government, that is to say, from us. While the economy and the future of Citigroup sort themselves out, a new ballpark is a different issue.

Not having been on this site since the Florida Marlins put the Mets out of their considerable misery six months ago, I was eager to see the new place. Shea Stadium is gone, reduced to a pile of rubble. The venerable No. 7 elevated line has a covered promenade leading straight toward the ballpark. Traffic flows more freely. What’s to miss?

I took a stroll around the ballpark, past young trees, pleasant benches, formidable walls and doors — not many opportunities for a kid from Corona, like Omar Minaya, to slip inside to watch a few innings after school, on his life’s path to becoming general manager. 

Behind closed gates was the Jackie Robinson Rotunda, built by the Wilpons in homage to the Italianate rotunda of Ebbets Field, where Brooklyn Dodgers fans used to meet. 

Under other circumstances, this ballpark could have been named for Robinson, despite the specious argument that pops up that Robinson never played for the Mets. And who knows, the stadium may yet be named for Robinson. With any luck, heroes outlast banks. 

In the endless video loop on two large screens in the rotunda, Robinson steals home in the 1955 World Series, and Yogi Berra hops up and down in dissension. When Yogi visits the rotunda sometime this season, he will surely hop up and down all over again. 

Near the rotunda, John Booth, a teacher from Greenwich, Conn., inspected the commemorative bricks with inscriptions like “Gets By Buckner” and “I Saw Todd Pratt’s Walkoff 1999.” Booth’s group had bought a brick that said “NY Mets = Life!” This early spring day seemed to reaffirm that sentiment.

Inside the gift shop on the ground floor, the air smells like money, from the cushy Gooden and Carter jerseys on sale. In the food court out behind right field, the air smells like sauerkraut. I bought a hot dog, and a pleasant concessions worker actually doled out a generous helping of sauerkraut at the condiment stand. How thoughtful.

In the broad corridors, where one can watch the game while noshing, Jim West was telling family members how he played hooky from Junior High School 16 in adjacent Corona on April 17, 1964, for the first home game in the Mets’ new park.

“It was a mess,” West said. “It was chaos.” The bathrooms didn’t work, and they never got any better in the 45 years of Shea. 

Things mostly worked on this day of discovery. The clunky press elevator, where I must have spent a year of my life waiting, has been replaced by a smooth, modern machine. 

Wearing a bright jacket that said Mets Construction Team was Mike Smith, a technology director for Hunt-Bovis, the company that built the new place. He was escorting his family to the game at the stadium he helped build. Smith’s father, John, was an usher in the Polo Grounds and Shea Stadium, and when the new place opens for the Red Sox on Friday, he will be working at his third Mets ballpark.

Amid all the new touches, there was a familiar face. John Franco marched out to deliver the first pitch, peeling off his blue Mets warm-up jacket to reveal a bright red jersey from St. John’s, his alma mater. Franco promptly threw his pitch into the dirt, but the fans applauded him anyway. They were in a benign mood on this day of exploration, this day of hope.

