On a day when Rickey Henderson and Jim Rice were voted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame, maybe it sounds vindictive to dwell upon the rejection of McGwire for the third consecutive year, but he brought it on himself.

The country is taking a look at people who played us for suckers. We may as well include athletes in the scrutiny. 

McGwire was turned down again even though he is eighth in the career standings with 583 home runs. Normally, that total would be enough to get anybody elected to the Hall, but times have not been normal since players’ shoulders began merging with their enlarged craniums back in the mid-90’s. 

Since retiring after the 2001 season, McGwire has become the canary in the coal mine for Barry Bonds, Sammy Sosa and Roger Clemens, all of whom are set to become eligible in 2013. 

Come to think of it, Bonds and Sosa may be wise to find some team that needs an immobile designated hitter, to postpone their reckoning with the hangin’ jury of baseball writers, who vote for inclusion into the Hall. 

That entire generation will be under suspicion for a very long time. McGwire did it to himself in 1998 when Steve Wilstein, then with The Associated Press, noticed a bottle of pills of something called androstenedione in McGwire’s locker. The curious reporter discovered it was an over-the-counter body-building substance, a form of anabolic steroid banned in other sports.

At first, McGwire blustered and made it a privacy issue, which it was not, since the bottle was in plain view. After he set the single-season home run record — now surpassed by Bonds — McGwire announced that he had stopped taking the stuff because he did not want to set a bad example for the youth of America, a noble sentiment, however tardy. Even more tardy, baseball ultimately banned andro.

McGwire would have been fine with his gesture of getting off the stuff, except that his old Bash Brother, Jose Canseco, wrote a book saying he and McGwire used to inject each other with steroids in Oakland. That brought McGwire to a Congressional hearing on March 17, 2005, along with Canseco and Sosa, plus Rafael Palmeiro, who denied all with a wag of his finger, and Curt Schilling, who knew nothing, nothing.

The biggest loser of the day was McGwire, who turned red and had tears in his eyes as he repeatedly told questioners, “I’m not here to talk about the past.” An educated man, he seemed to know what he was doing, but he blundered on. One committee member asked if McGwire was pleading the Fifth Amendment, the way mobsters used to do. Another threatened to take McGwire’s name down from a five-mile section of interstate in St. Louis. 

That hearing still plays like an endless loop in people’s minds — one of the most embarrassing public moments any prominent athlete has ever endured. The eight members of the 1919 Chicago White Sox were too unsophisticated to comprehend the consequences of being permanently barred for their roles in throwing the World Series. Pete Rose was far too much of an addicted gambler to understand what he was doing to himself when he denied betting on baseball.

McGwire has not been ruled ineligible for the Hall the way Shoeless Joe Jackson of the Black Sox and Rose have been. I have no vote because The New York Times has a sensible policy of not allowing reporters to vote for awards, but I would have voted for Henderson, and probably for Rice, but definitely not for McGwire, who received 23.5 percent of the vote in 2007 and 23.6 last year and slipped to 21.9 this year. Players need 75 percent of the vote to be elected.

Tony La Russa, who managed McGwire in Oakland and St. Louis, still supports him for the Hall, saying McGwire was “overcoached” for that 2005 appearance. McGwire, who lives quietly in California, could still reveal exactly what he used, and when he used it. It’s his only way out. 

I could also make the point that McGwire was a somewhat one-dimensional ballplayer who swatted a lot of home runs in an age when everybody else did. I might lump Sosa with McGwire, as a symptom of the times, despite Sosa’s 609 home runs. 

Clemens was a great pitcher, but I would not vote for him because of growing suspicion that he was dirty. Federal prosecutors have convened a grand jury in Washington to investigate whether Clemens committed perjury last February when he denied ever using performance-enhancing drugs. 

Bonds may yet be judged guilty of perjury and tax evasion, but was a great player, even without illegal help from a laboratory. However, if I had a vote, I would hold off on him, just because. 

The funny thing is that while Major League Baseball and the Hall of Fame have disqualified Jackson and Rose, the decision on the steroid generation is left to the 500-plus voters from the Baseball Writers’ Association of America. 

In a terrible economic time for traditional journalism, the print writers who actually witness games and interview baseball people are still entrusted with this decision. A few knuckleheads occasionally decline to vote for Rickey Henderson or Tom Seaver or Joe DiMaggio, but they are the keepers of a flickering flame. 

When the time comes, I expect many writers will vote with their suspicions about Sosa, Clemens and Bonds, the same way they overwhelmingly declined to vote for McGwire. It is his own fault. 

