At first, I was not going back to Yankee Stadium for one more nostalgic glimpse before it is torn down. But then I spotted Tony La Russa in the stands the other night, taking a sentimental journey on a night off, and I decided to take one more look around.

This is not the same Yankee Stadium where, as a youngster, I saw a dying Babe Ruth in 1947, or, as a young reporter, covered Mickey Mantle’s shot off Barney Schultz in the 1964 World Series. But it is the same renovated Stadium, on the same site, where I covered the Yankees of Williams, Rivera, Jeter, Pettitte, Posada — and Torre.

Joe Torre. Yes. There is change all over the New York area. The Yankees, Mets, Giants, Jets and Nets are all building pleasure palaces based on tax breaks, legal or otherwise, and the presumption that all those rich and giddy American corporations will subsidize luxury boxes for the shrimp-eaters and the wine-sippers. Let us hope that this economic gamble works better than the Yankee owners’ zeal to run Torre out of the manager’s office last October.

Remember how George Steinbrenner delivered his blast from the past, blustering that if the Yankees could not get past Cleveland in the postseason, then Torre was surely gone? That’s exactly what happened. Now the Yankees are going down as listlessly as any version of the team since the Stump Merrill years. This is not necessarily the fault of Joe Girardi, the current manager, but it is instructive nonetheless.

Soon the bulldozers of the front office will tear down this Yankee team, followed by widespread urban renewal for the Mets, who are falling apart before our eyes for the second straight season.

While all is gloom and doom in New York ballparks, there is one constant in baseball: Joe Torre will be going to the postseason. A faithful reader, Noah Buschel, reminded me in an e-mail message that Torre is about to qualify for the postseason for the 13th consecutive season, to move within one of the record, held by Bobby Cox of Atlanta.

Torre won four World Series in his first five seasons, taking three straight rounds each time. (Casey Stengel won five straight World Series from 1949 through 1953, in a simpler one-tier format.) Torre’s 12 straight postseasons are pretty neat, but as a reward he was run out of town by the bumptious owners. 

It was probably time for Torre to go for his own sake, and maybe he knew it when he refused a humiliating offer of a one-year contract. He was not about to produce miracles with this lot, but he still had the respect of the veterans and the newer players, whose bodies and work habits have fallen apart under Girardi, for whatever reasons. 

Torre looked great last spring — 5 or 10 years younger, when I saw him in Florida — like a guy who could breathe again, away from the grim forces of the Steinbrenners. Torre has since dealt with the disintegration of Andruw Jones and made the most of the gift from the gods, the mysterious Manny Ramírez deposited on his doorstep. 

Not only that, but Torre managed the Dodgers without the backdrop of jackhammers and cranes and rerouted traffic that has given New York its unstable aura this season, on both sides of the Hudson.

Both New York baseball teams have bet their money, our tax money and government-supported infrastructure, on corporate-subsidized luxury boxes and seats, backed up, theoretically, by individuals with fortunes to burn on conspicuous consumption like waiter service at ballparks. 

I always thought of baseball as a Depression sport. In tough times, a latter-day Studs Lonigan could always plunk down a few quarters and spend a few hours at the ballpark. But now the two New York clubs, and their football cousins, have committed their core personality and economic future to corporations that we, all of us, are subsidizing with our own dwindling dollars.

Forget about the Naming Rights Jinx that has struck a large number of corporations-on-the-make that put their names on sports palaces in the past generation. What about the companies that have underwritten all that munching and sipping by visitors who are vaguely aware of the event taking place outside the soundproof windows? What happens when those folks tap out?

In these Final Days, I have received a number of e-mail messages from Yankee fans second-guessing the tearing down of the second version of the House That Ruth Built. It is too late, of course, but these fans say they could have put up with the inconveniences of that living museum. 

My non-nostalgic opinion is that Yankee Stadium is physically outmoded as well as overly reliant on automobiles. Decades late, the jokers who run our region are finally building train stations at Yankee Stadium and the Meadowlands. (Shea Stadium was a dump the day it opened in 1964, but the new place looks quite pretty from the outside.)

The Yankee ownership did not have the loyalty to the historic Stadium that many of the fans did. How smart are the Steinbrenners? They pushed Joe Torre out. Now he is heading for his 13th consecutive appearance in the postseason. Did I mention that?

