Danny Jordaan was flying from Johannesburg toward New York on Tuesday, representing his homeland, when the pilot announced that early voting favored Barack Obama. It reminded him of another election.

“I was 46 when I cast my first vote in 1994,” Jordaan recalled. Then he added, “I was elected to Parliament.”

It was a strange evening to be landing in New York. Jordaan, the chairman of the South African committee that will stage the World Cup of soccer in 2010, watched the celebration on CNN and compared the mood in America to the mood in South Africa on Feb. 11, 1990, the day Nelson Mandela walked out of prison after 27 years. 

“The majority celebrated,” recalled Jordaan, who had worked against apartheid without going to prison or into exile. “But many people did not celebrate,” he recalled. “You have to be magnanimous.”

Obama has long expressed his respect for Mandela, saying he had been inspired by a visit to Mandela’s former prison cell on Robben Island. In turn, Mandela sent a message to Obama on Wednesday, saying, in part, “Your victory has demonstrated that no person anywhere in the world should not dare to dream of wanting to change the world for a better place.”

After a long flight, Jordaan is in New York, seeing the images of people laughing and crying, often at the same time. Americans of a certain age are recalling demonstrations against segregation and perhaps the concussion of police truncheons on their heads. 

South Africans like Jordaan, a former cricket and soccer player, later a teacher and activist, can remember apartheid, violence, prison. They can also recall the pariah status in world sport, from 1964 until 1992, when South Africa was banned from the World Cup and the Olympics. 

But now South Africa is part of the club, the designated host of sub-Saharan Africa in major world sporting events. South Africa has already held the World Cup of rugby in 1995, when President Mandela sported the green jersey of the Springboks, the South African rugby team, the symbol of white power, white prowess. 

Predominately white crowds chanted “Nel-son! Nel-son!” — and the Springboks beat the fabled All-Blacks (for their uniforms) of New Zealand in the final, and Mandela danced for joy. And then there was the 2003 World Cup of cricket, shared with Zimbabwe and Kenya.

The world soccer body, known as FIFA, has committed itself to spreading its top events to all the continents, to its credit, even though the costs may outweigh any tangible return. Now Jordaan has flown to New York on this portentous week to assure everybody that the 2010 World Cup will be a success. 

Joseph S. Blatter, the president of FIFA, once mentioned a Plan B for the World Cup, then amended his remarks to say they referred only to natural disaster. But Jordaan knows there is skepticism about the stadiums, the hotels, the transportation, the security. 

Just about every major sports tournament around the world is dogged by tardiness, incompetence, graft, repression, you name it. The tear gas from civil unrest had barely been cleared before the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, and they were a success. The trolley lines and expressways had barely been opened in Athens in time for the 2004 Summer Games. 

“And we finished half an hour before the first game,” Sunil Gulati, the president of the United States Soccer Federation, said about the 1994 World Cup in the U.S. 

But a tournament for 32 national teams, including the woeful national team of South Africa, automatically invited as host, is a huge task from a nation still only 14 years past gigantic change. A caretaker government is in charge at the moment, awaiting a new election in 2009, but Jordaan suavely noted that Germany had a change of parties as well as chancellors shortly before the highly successful 2006 World Cup. 

He noted that the rand, the national currency, had drifted from 6.5 per American dollar to approximately 11 per dollar in recent months, but said ticket prices had been fixed at 7 rand per dollar, to assure fans from poorer nations of being able to acquire tickets. The normal black market for major world events will undoubtedly raise prices for many tickets.

Jordaan reassured a dubious journalist — that is to say, me — that the hosts would protect reporters who are usually the last to leave the darkened stadiums, carrying valuable laptops, seeking transportation to hotel or train station.

He showed slides of the 10 stadiums that either exist or will exist at some point — gorgeous buildings with sweeping roofs over the stands, including one in Durban with a view of the beach from the arch over the field. Then there is Mbombela Stadium in Nelspruit, which Jordaan said is only 15 minutes from Kruger National Park, a game preserve near the Crocodile River. 

Asked about potential hooligans from unspecified nations who might act out during the World Cup, Jordaan smiled and said they would be housed near the lions and tigers in the game park. Right away, I felt greatly reassured about security at the next World Cup.

