The Cubs’ plane flew directly over Yankee Stadium on Sunday night. Within that glow, undetectable Yanks and Orioles were playing the last game on that ancient field where Lou Piniella used to work.

In other circumstances, Piniella might have attended the farewell ceremony before the game, stacked up with all the other classic right fielders, both corporal and spiritual. Only the Yankees have Hall of Famers and hometown heroes the way college football teams have five or six units. (They are so deep they never mentioned Joe Torre — undoubtedly an oversight from the gracious House of Steinbrenner, don’t you think?)

Piniella could have been there, hearing the familiar “Lo-o-o-o-u!” chant that began with him, but he had other obligations to the Cubs. He played for four major league teams and he is managing his fifth club. He won a World Series in 1990 in historic Cincinnati, a grand old baseball town, but this time he has a chance to do something really momentous.

His place on Sunday was with the Cubs, taking no chances with upsetting the rhythm of a season that has seen Chicago win 95 and lose 60, including Monday night’s long, cool and sloppy 9-5 victory over the staggering Mets. Piniella, seeming exasperated, had to use five pitchers, but he is in better shape than the Mets, who might be better off out of their considerable misery. 

The Cubs have had enough misfortune in the 99 seasons since their last championship season of 1908. No need to go over the billy-goat foolishness of 1945 or the Bartman horror of 2003, which we writers resurrect, much to the annoyance of anybody in a Cubs uniform, particularly Sweet Lou. 

Some Cubs fans of a certain age have not forgotten the strange absence of the dandy manager, Leo Durocher, in July 1969. Durocher had told the club he had a stomach ache. In fact, he took an excursion with his wife to visit her son at a summer camp in Wisconsin. Thus, the Curse of Camp Ojibwa. 

As Mets fans of a certain age like to recall, the Cubs blew the division race to the Mets that September. It is unclear whether Piniella knows this little factoid, and I surely did not ask him about it in the dugout before Monday night’s game. In the year of Leo’s little road trip, 1969, Piniella was hitting .282 in his first full major league season with Kansas City, somewhat belatedly at the age of 26. It’s not his history. 

Piniella is now managing a talented and cohesive Cubs team that has nothing to do with the decades of frustration in Chicago. 

He is getting ready for the postseason, having done it before. He is setting up his pitching rotation, giving some players a rest, and remembering that he plays the Mets and Brewers on the road in this final week, and that they are fighting for the postseason.

He is reminding his players not to let up. The other day Carlos Zambrano could not get out of the second inning, and when Piniella removed him, Zambrano stalked off, eager to get away. Piniella urged him to get back on the mound and wait for his reliever, as per team custom. The message was loud, and it was public, and it was clear. 

Sweet Lou has the hammer down, no time to relish what the Cubs have done so far. But he does savor the events in two of the teams he has managed.

“They got rid of the ‘Devil’ and they’re in the postseason,” Piniella chortled about the home-region team he managed from 2003 to 2005, and which changed its name from Devil Rays to Rays this year, and is leading the American League East.

Why didn’t he think of that when he was working in Tampa Bay? “I think it has more to do with pitching and hitting,” he said.

Piniella added that he watched the end of the Yankee game after the Cubs’ flight landed and he got to his hotel room. “I had goose bumps, watching the players come off the field,” he said, referring to the touching parade of the Yankees, one victory lap around the ball park, led by the captain, Derek Jeter, who seemed invigorated from behind his normal cool facade.

Sweet Lou stopped short of regret and instant nostalgia, noting the new stadium “will be a wonderful, wonderful venue.” He added, “They’re going across the street. They’ll pick up next April where they left off.”

Always a favorite of the Yankees owner, George M. Steinbrenner — even when they were squabbling — Piniella grew somber when asked about the Boss, who was not strong enough to come from Tampa. 

“He’s been the boss there for a long time,” Piniella said, rather subdued. “I have a special relationship with the entire family. It hurts to see him not there. He’s got to do what’s best for George now.”

Piniella has left a piece of himself wherever he went. He now has a chance to accomplish something in a city that has merely been waiting a century.

