On the day after the New York City Marathon, the roadway in Central Park was still a special place, almost a shrine, to the millions of feet that have padded through. 

Moving gingerly but proudly, runners dressed in comfortable clothing returned to the park Monday to have their pictures taken in front of the finish line they had crossed a day earlier. I heard Japanese, Italian, Spanish, French, the international sound of the marathon. Noisy drills were being used to take apart the temporary steel bleachers that are erected for that one afternoon a year.

The runners holding up their medals had no reason to know that two of the 37,899 runners who passed this way sometime Sunday afternoon had died shortly afterward. 

“Two of our athletes did not return home,” Mary Wittenberg, the race director and president of the New York Road Runners, announced, visibly moved, at the day-after news conference. The Road Runners, the race organizer, would not disclose the names of the runners, out of deference to their families, but Wittenberg’s shaken presence told everybody that there had been a death in the Road Runners’ family, too. 

“I was talking to a doctor last night,” Wittenberg said later in a private interview. “She said that every person is given a card,” suggesting a gift card with an unknown quantity in it. 

Wittenberg, who won the Marine Corps Marathon in 1987 and a year later ran in the United States Olympic marathon trials, said that runners could work up to marathon length or just run shorter distances, and that running was good for the health of almost everybody who runs.

“But everyone’s life is a significant loss,” she added. 

Many, many others will apply to run next year, as the marathon continues to test just how far it can grow. When it began in 1970, it was a quaint little race around Central Park, turning the 127 runners into virtual hamsters on a wheel, but since 1976 it has taken in the five boroughs. 

To a nonrunner, the marathon does not seem appreciably different over the past quarter-century — out to Staten Island in the darkness, a tour of the boroughs, a finish in Central Park. 

The biggest difference, Wittenberg said, is the $18.2 million raised for charity this year, with more expected in the next few weeks. In the old days, the marathon had not evolved to charitable causes. 

The current size of the race is already putting stress on the crowded streets of the old city. The mass of runners went off in three waves this year for the first time. Wittenberg said the Road Runners would study the results, but she admitted that the club did not think it had stopped expanding. 

Wittenberg added that parts of the course could not stand a greater bulge of runners: for example, the right turn by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, around the eighth mile. The organizers do not want their runners picked off, like basketball players running into a tile pillar in some old church basement gym. In a time of abrupt change, the marathon needs its landmarks.

Next year there will be new baseball stadiums in the Bronx and Queens — maybe good business, maybe not, depending on whose taxes are being used, and whose parkland is being gobbled up, and what happens to the wonderful corporations now being subsidized by you and me. But changing the route of a race is trickier. 

The Tour de France changes its course every year, putting stages in municipalities willing to pay for the traveling circus. Next year, for the very first time, the Tour will send cyclists up a formidable mountain on the final Saturday, the last day of real competition. Could the marathon do the same thing by arranging a run out to Coney Island one year, a detour to Van Cortlandt Park the next? It’s hard to imagine the city rejiggering its logistics and informing spectators, who now head for the barricades out of habit. 

What about separate days for men and women? The city could never shut down twice or produce the same enthusiasm twice in a year, and the weather could shift from brilliant to miserable. The marathon needs to be an equal-opportunity spectacle.

Wittenberg knows that. Asked how big the marathon could become, she tossed out the number 45,000, depending on staggered waves, as long as the runners did not step on one another’s toes in the chutes. 

The race should always end in the park, near the statue of its founding father, Fred Lebow, which is moved every year from its regular spot on the East Side. On Monday, Lebow’s statue was still over on the West Side, with bouquets of flowers resting on its pedestal. Fred would smirk at the flowers. He never said he was a saint, not the way he was doling out appearance money to attract top runners, but he was a visionary.

The marathon seems to have passed into other capable hands. It won’t be long before they put the bleachers back in the park.

