The caller was screaming on the late-night sports-talk show. Well, that’s redundant. They all scream. He was hyperventilating about the bad job the Tampa Bay fans did Wednesday night in the first World Series game ever held in Tropicana Field. 

The screamer was referring to the moment when the Phillies’ Ryan Howard leaned into the stands behind first base and came back with a) the ball, b) his glove and c) his hand. 

This would not happen up north in New York or Boston or Philadelphia, the caller squawked, if a rival first baseman tried to catch a foul pop. (On the North Side of Chicago, interference is inadvertently committed on home-team left fielders. But that’s another story.)

The Tampa Bay supporters did not necessarily toughen up for Game 2 of the Series on Thursday night, but the Rays did, holding on to beat the Phillies, 4-2, to even the Series.

Our longtime-first-time caller had a point. (I had plenty of time to listen, given the amazing traffic jam on I-275 heading back to Tampa 90 minutes after the game. I thought people were reluctant to take bridges to ballgames in this region.) By that time, it was 1:30 a.m., what with Major League Baseball’s fetish for keeping the World Series out of the sight of children and anybody with a day job back east. 

As they did for the first game of the Series, Rays fans, some sporting Mohawks, mingled with Phillies fans with no sign of hostility on Thursday at Tropicana. Fans visited the diverse food court and the Ted Williams Museum (free for ticket-holders) folded inside the rotunda behind center field.

The mood was far more benign than at postseason games in New York or Boston, perhaps because of the mild weather outside, humid, in the 70s, that seemed to calm the spirits of the fans. Stable individuals may be satisfied with this ambience, but some sports fans want more buzz, or hostility.

Wednesday’s play by Howard — the one in which the fans let him alone — was significant. It happened in the fifth inning with a runner on base and B. J. Upton, who had already hit seven home runs this postseason, at bat. Upton lofted a high pop off first base, near Howard, who is not the reincarnation of Hodges, Mattingly or Hernandez. But he is a supple athlete, for all his Barkleyesque bulk, at 6 feet 4 inches and 255 pounds. 

Howard drifted over to the railing, expertly, extended his long arm and encountered no competition — no flailing, no clutching, no whacking. The ball popped into his glove, and stuck there for the third out. Rally over. 

“As I got closer, the ball was up in the lights,” Howard said, referring to the very bright lights that circle the dome. So the fans lost the ball in the lights?

“Everyone was staring at the ball,” Howard said later. “It wasn’t like anybody was trying to snatch it away.”

The question is, why not? Fans are allowed to go after anything in the stands, even if the fielder extends his glove over the railing. But the fans are not supposed to reach out past the railing and touch the ball, as happened to Moises Alou when he encountered the Cubs fan Steve Bartman in that now-famous 2003 disaster. 

Sometimes, the contact is absolutely intentional. Gene Mauch, the Phillies’ manager back in 1966, swatted the glove of Mets catcher Jerry Grote as he leaned into the Phillies’ dugout. Mauch knew the rulebook and was allowed to make physical contact, perhaps on the premise that he had been swatting gnats. The rule was changed afterward, forbidding a fielder from entering the dugout but also forbidding people in the dugout from interfering with a fielder. 

There are no such niceties in the stands. Jeff Kent was a rookie second baseman with the Blue Jays in 1992 when he drifted into foul territory off short right field. He caught the ball in the crowd, but then the Bronx caved in on him.

“I had about three people holding onto my arm and wanting every part of me,” Kent said later. “I’ve never experienced that. They have some tough fans. One guy had a good grip on my forearm.” 

Another tried to wrestle the glove off Kent’s hand, and he had to grapple to keep the glove. Then there was the language, directed not only at Kent but later at the Yankees’ resident icon, Don Mattingly. That’s the way it’s done up north.

Will Phillies fans give Tampa Bay first baseman Carlos Peña as much room as the St. Pete crowd gave Howard?

“That’s a good question,” said Jimmy Rollins, the Phillies’ shortstop, who understood why the Rays’ fans gave Howard plenty of room. 

“Ryan’s pretty big,” Rollins said, suggesting that a souvenir ball might not be worth being run over by a big man.

Howard was not thrilled with his lack of production in the postseason, but in this polite corner of baseball, he had survived to play another day.

