Just for the record, the fans were already showing their backsides to the Jets even before Brett Favre’s 38-year-old body was inelegantly slung for a 20-yard loss late in the fourth quarter. That’s a big loss for any quarterback, much less a great one like Favre. 

Giving up on the home team was a violation of civic pride back in Wisconsin, where Favre plied his trade as quarterback until this strange retirement-comeback of his. Those Green Bay fans owned a piece of the team, and were not easily chased out of the stadium. 

But Jets fans — with decades of general futility engrained — know they have a monstrous construction pit to flee once they make their move from doomed Giants Stadium, followed by traffic jams on the tangled roadways, so they do not need much excuse to head for the exits early. And the Jets reminded them with their play, which ranged from conservative to feeble. Not as inept as the Mets’ bullpen a couple of bridges to the east, but part of the urban blight, to be sure. 

By the time many of the 78,554 paying fans had even reached their cars in the rude chaos around the stadium, Favre had suffered his first loss as a Jet, a 19-10 drubbing by the System.

A substitute quarterback, Matt Cassel, who had not started a game since high school, fit into the Patriots’ machine with more success than Favre had into the Jets’, even when the Jets’ game plan allowed Favre to rear back and fling the ball downfield, which he still does well. 

A game plan apparently left over from the be-kind-to-Chad-Pennington’s-right-arm days had Favre handing off or making short flips. But probably that was what New England was giving the Jets. Favre played good soldier about the game plan that had him complete 18 of 26 passes for 181 yards.

The real question would have been, “Brett, what in the world are you doing here?” But that would have been impudent to ask Favre, the great quarterback with the bristly gray crew cut, who retired from Green Bay and, when he changed his mind, discovered the locks had been changed. “I hate to dwell on the losses, but that’s why I came back,” Favre said afterward, meaning he came back to win some more games. 

He did win the opening game in Miami last week, but Sunday’s game was against the American Football Conference powerhouse Patriots, who were about to play without Tom Brady, whose injured knee will keep him out all season. So there was an opening Favre, as a member of the quarterback lodge, would never have wished on anybody. 

The gallant thing would have been to acknowledge that Favre still has the arm and the head to loft the ball toward whichever springy young receivers are in Jets uniforms. 

But the Jets understood this was still the team that rolled undefeated into the Super Bowl last season before being shocked by the Giants.

“We know Tom Brady doesn’t play defense,” said Jerricho Cotchery, who figured in a 41-yard completion that was called back because of pass interference against Cotchery, which did not have the blatant pushing or tripping usually associated with an offensive penalty. The play demonstrated that Cotchery can chase down a long Favre pass. There is hope.

Favre was asked about the three straight runs called from the Jets’ coaches when the Jets had first-and-goal from the Patriots’ 3-yard line. They wound up kicking a field goal.

“I would have liked to have scored,” Favre said, meaning he would have preferred a touchdown. He added, “I don’t second-guess Schotty’s calls one bit,” a reference to the offensive coordinator, Brian Schottenheimer, who sent in the calls. Favre added: “Would I have liked to have thrown it? I’d like to throw on every play, but you’re not going to win that way. 

“There’s no guarantee a pass would have worked. So, yes, I would. It has nothing to do with second-guessing his decision. I thought we could run it in, as well.” 

Favre praised the Patriots, saying they had as good a defensive line as any team, and recalling how the System had bedeviled him in Green Bay, too. But mostly he saw the game as a lost opportunity for his new team.

“It’s a setback,” Favre said. “I feel like this team is capable of winning every week. That’s what the other locker room thinks. There’s 14 left.” He added: “It’s a home game. There’s seven more. That’s not the start I wanted.”

Favre blamed himself for the interception two plays after the Cotchery penalty. An underthrown pass toward tight end Bubba Franks was picked off by Brandon Meriweather, setting up a touchdown three minutes later that gave many Jets fans the idea of getting a head start on the nightmare retreat from the swamplands. 

They’ve made that forlorn schlep since coming over here for the 1984 season. Now they’ve turned tail on a future Hall of Fame quarterback. That’s a new twist.

