The World Series has come to funky old St. Pete. 

This is, quite frankly, an astonishing development for any baseball fan who remembers St. Pete as a haven on the flyway north, where elderly snowbirds congregated and young players ran around in rubber suits, sweating off the winter, and then they all migrated north when the weather was tolerable. 

Baseball in late October? Impossible. The old Cardinals and Yankees and Mets, who all used to train here, could understand a zippy upgraded team like the Rays’ winning the pennant easier than St. Pete’s suddenly being host to the World Series.

I’ll admit, I felt disjointed on Saturday when I arrived here for the final showdown between the Red Sox and the Rays. There was something wrong with the natural order, to be here in October. I chose to stay downtown, which I used to identify as God’s waiting room, but which has been somewhat upgraded, although not nearly as drastically as the amazing Rays.

In October, I searched for the ghosts of spring training past. I grew up a Brooklyn Dodgers fan but spent many hours listening to Mel Allen on the radio, calling Yankees games from Al Lang Field, describing the sun-dappled waters of Tampa Bay. We would be trekking around the arctic tundra of central Queens — Al Gore or no Al Gore, the snows were much deeper back in the old days — and Mel would be making St. Pete sound like paradise. 

The first time I saw St. Pete was in March 1961, on spring break with my wife. We drove straight through the night, arriving on a Sunday morning, and, oaf that I am, I sought out Al Lang Field. 

From my car, I spotted a couple of guys strolling down the sidewalk, each carrying a bat in his hand — Stan Musial and Red Schoendienst, to be precise. As I recall it, they were in uniform, about to take a bus ride to Tampa or Sarasota, but my wife says, no, they were wearing collared sport shirts. Maybe they had just come from church. At any rate, just spotting Stan and Red, I was in young-sportswriter heaven.

In 1963, I was sent down to cover the Mets’ second spring training, at tiny Huggins-Stengel Field, alongside a pleasant little lake. The field originally had been named for Miller Huggins, the tiny manager Babe Ruth had terrorized with his antics, but now it had been renamed to include Casey Stengel. 

Most of the time, Casey sat on a bench behind the batting cage and told stories to “my writers” while his Metsies took dead aim at Crescent Lake out behind right field. 

When it was close to game time, the Mets would put flip-flops on their stocking feet and pile into yellow cabs to take them a mile or so to Al Lang Field, which they shared with the Cardinals. It was so cute. The Mets looked like children being escorted to a pajama party. 

I remember three things about Al Lang Field: the line drive that hit Carlton Willey in the jaw in 1964, essentially ending his career; Looie Kleppel, an old Giants fan, loud and abrasive, who had adopted the Mets, much to their consternation; and Dick Young, taking off his shirt, not a pretty sight, on the sun deck alongside the press box. Some times there was also a singing vendor who could be heard all over the park. 

That was old St. Pete. There will be no spring training in a few months because the Rays have moved to a modern camp in Port Charlotte, a few hours down the coast. I could not bring myself to inspect Al Lang Field, now folded inside the corporate name of Progress Energy Park, but I did make a pilgrimage to Huggins-Stengel Field, which is as bucolic as ever.

Since the Mets defected in 1988 to the inland desolation of Port St. Lucie, across the peninsula, the Orioles and the Rays used the field, but now it is part of a municipal youth program. I took a couple of laps around Crescent Lake with its Sunday morning baby strollers and cyclists and joggers and dog-walkers, and then I spotted ball players limbering up on the exquisitely maintained ball field. No, it was not Charlie Neal and Jim Hickman and Jay Hook, the boys of 1963, but a mix of athletic 20-somethings and stockier middle-aged men.

A man in the tiny bleachers said he was the coordinator of this Sunday amateur league. I started to give him a history of the Mets’ spring training, but he seemed preoccupied. 

“We’re a little short on players today,” he said, checking out my Oakland Oaks T-shirt. “Would you want a game?”

“A few years ago I would have said yes,” I said. “But my hamstrings and my wife would tell me not to be a fool.”

“I hear you, brother,” he said.

I left them, hoping they would corral enough players. A few hours later I watched the Rays win the pennant, just as the Mets did in 1969, when they trained in funky old St. Pete. Not a bad way for the old place to go out. 

