It is that time of year. Like marathon dancers in an earlier hard time, the Knicks and the Nets are staggering onward — knees buckling, shoulders sagging, propelled by the sheer tropism of will and desperation.

The two teams hardly looked like dance partners Wednesday night. The Nets had the spring and the Knicks stumbled around their home court in a 115-89 loss that brought back a few boos from the Isiah years. The Nets also moved a half-game ahead of the Knicks in their struggle, perhaps delusional, to reach the playoffs.

With both teams back from long Western swings, the Nets freed up Vince Carter early, and wisely used Brook Lopez inside to negate David Lee. 

These two franchises from opposite sides of the Hudson River have very little in common in terms of glamour or location. The Knicks play in Midtown Manhattan, while the Nets are stuck in a depressing construction site over in New Jersey. 

But they had much in common this week: each is still talking about making the playoffs, each is clearing space on its roster for the possibility of signing LeBron James in the great free-agency run of 2010, and each is planning a new look in arenas — the Knicks through imminent renovation, the Nets through their long-promised Brooklyn palace, if and when. 

•

But the thing they had most in common was pain. Devin Harris, the Nets’ high-scoring point guard, was not in uniform Wednesday in the Nets’ victory because of an injured left shoulder.

And the Knicks’ impressive rookie, Danilo Gallinari, flew home to Italy, seeking a second, or third, or fourth opinion on his aching back, where a disk may or may not be causing the pain he feels. Surgery is possible. 

It doesn’t seem to make sense for a 6-foot-10 athlete to fly across the ocean — let’s assume in first class — but Coach Mike D’Antoni tried to explain the trip home: “Maybe he wanted to hear it in his language.” 

Harris and Gallinari are not alone. Various other players, particularly Chris Duhon of the Knicks, were feeling the wear and tear of a long season. Duhon had sat out the previous two games but came off the bench to play more than 30 minutes, still not looking very energetic.

“Unexplainable, inexcusable,” Duhon said afterward. “In a so-called playoff game, to come out and play like this.”

The Knicks did survive a scare on Tuesday. Eddy Curry, who has played all of three minutes in this demoralizing season, collided with Al Harrington — one of the Knicks’ many rent-a-players, just passing through, who has been productive and positive.

Harrington sprained his right ankle, but he was wearing the Knicks’ dark-green St. Patrick’s Day-Plus-One uniform Wednesday and led the team with 21 points. 

The long and winding season is complicated for the Knicks, since they have been running transients in and out of the lineup.

“We’ve had three teams this year,” D’Antoni noted. He was referring to the Dark Ages of Zach Randolph and Jamal Crawford, then the Middle Ages after Harrington came on board, and now the modest little renaissance since Larry Hughes has brought his shooting game over from Chicago. 

While waiting for yet another age starting in 2010, D’Antoni sometimes criticizes his team for not giving enough effort, but early Wednesday evening he admitted, “Sometimes when a coach doesn’t have anything to say, he talks about effort,” adding, “I go back and look at the tapes — and they’re trying.” After the game he said: “I thought we were horrible in every facet of the game. We just didn’t play.” And he was right.

