No triple digits. Having been reminded about the 98 full sports seasons without a championship, the loyal if twitchy fans of Philadelphia do not have to worry about the odometer reaching 99. 

Having been confused by a brief lead in a rainstorm on Monday night, the Phillies recouped Wednesday night, beating the charming upstart Rays, 4-3, to capture the World Series, the first since their only previous championship in 1980. 

History did repeat itself, in a good way. Instead of Tug McGraw striking out Willie Wilson for the 1980 title, there was Brad Lidge striking out Eric Hinske, then babbling over national television how much he loved his teammates and the city, while the fans and the city rumbled with joy.

The Series had seemed as sodden as a picnic lunch left out in a hurricane but after exactly a 46-hour delay, the Phillies played like champions in front of a gallery of fans, almost all of them wearing red. 

After Pedro Feliz slapped the winning run up the middle in the seventh inning, and Lidge finished off the Rays in the ninth, the fans let loose, both here in the sports complex on the south side of town and no doubt radiating up Broad Street.

All year long, as the Phillies tackled the champion Red Sox in a midsummer interleague series, and tangled with the Mets in their division, they created expectations in a city that had seen Donovan McNabb and Allen Iverson and Eric Lindros fall short. This city had not won a major title since Julius Erving led the 76ers to the N.B.A. championship in 1983. Omitting two seasons cut short by labor trouble, that meant this town had not celebrated for over 25 years. (Villanova’s stunning upset over Georgetown in 1985 for the national college basketball title apparently does not count.) This year, with a down-home manager, Charlie Manuel, the Phillies raised expectations.

“Seeing the excitement from the beginning, the multiple sellouts, the playoff excitement, the fans stepped up,” said Cole Hamels, the most valuable player of this Series, who started this game two nights earlier. 

“They could taste it,” Hamels said. “They added to it.”

In the anticipation there was also confusion. The people in the streets had been in a raucous mood Sunday night in Center City after the Phillies took a three-games-to-one lead. But on Monday the fans were thinking that if the game had been stopped with the Phillies leading, 2-1, after five innings they could have won an abbreviated game — and the Series. I suspect they would have taken it, although Hamels said no. 

But B. J. Upton, one of the young stars of the Rays, who stunned and thrilled baseball fans by coming from nowhere, took baseball off the hook by creating a run with muddy water sloshing over his shoes. He singled, stole second and hydroplaned home with a nifty slide. If the Rays had come back to win, it would have become one of the great runs in World Series history, somewhat in the tradition of Enos Slaughter, who never stopped running from first base in the eighth inning of the seventh game of the 1946 Series.

“I would not have allowed a World Series to end this way,” Commissioner Bud Selig said after ruling the game would be resumed after the monsoon ended, tied or otherwise. The Fox broadcasters were not told, and neither were the fans or the journalists, that Selig was committed to waiting until Thanksgiving to finish nine innings, or so he said.

The loss of focus was partially baseball’s fault — for playing so late into October, for starting at night in the Northeast, in defiance of autumn weather and in contempt of millions of fans in that time zone. However, the elements are part of baseball — thank goodness — and there is absolutely no reason to contemplate warm-weather or indoor sites. 

The dome in Florida has been a happy place for the past month because of the Rays’ improbable surge, but it is still a dome, essentially gloomy, with catwalks hanging ominously over the field. Nature is part of baseball, and must continue to be that way. But at least baseball could be clear and consistent with its approach to rain delays.

The two teams were still tied, 2-2, going into the bottom of the sixth inning Wednesday night.

“It’s kind of weird, kind of odd, that the game is going to start with the seventh-inning stretch,” said Brett Myers of the Phillies, who exaggerated by an inning, but made his point nonetheless. 

The teams traded runs and then in the seventh, the Phillies manufactured the winning run that meant there would not be a Game 6. The season is over, albeit with lowered television ratings because these teams are not considered glamorous by most of America — not an issue in this town at the moment. 

Forty-six hours later, the Phillies put an end to the communal losing streak that has been hammered into the citizenry’s consciousness in recent months. Hamels could feel the yearning in the town and even in the Champagne-drenched celebration he knew it would only get better over the years — “when we come back and we’re old and retired and they give us a standing ovation, just like they did with the guys from the 1980 Series,” he said
