With his strawberry-blond locks and fair cheeks, Fernando Torres of Spain does not look like the grim, physical forward who could bedevil mighty Germany. 

However, elbows extended or hands misdirecting a defender, Torres helped bring down Germany Sunday in the greatest moment in Spanish soccer of this generation — or perhaps ever. 

Torres scored the only goal of the 1-0 victory in Vienna, giving Spain the Euro 2008 championship, its first major title since 1964. But his willed goal in the 33rd minute was not his only contribution. 

He and his teammates did what had been unthinkable during long decades of Spanish failure of heart and mind and toe. Spain preoccupied Germany so thoroughly that the Germans never could mount one of those late rallies that have made them the opposite of Spain. 

Remember the two goals that enabled Germany to catch France in extra time in the World Cup semifinals in 1982, leaving a French player dripping with blood? Then there was the last-minute goal against gallant Turkey in this tournament a week ago. Germany almost always comes back, and particularly against a nation whose supporters had grown accustomed to collapse. 

Francisco Franco came and went. Pablo Picasso came and went. Victoria de los Ángeles came and went. But on the lush grass of the World Cup or the European Championship, the Spaniards remained constant in their ability to frustrate. 

In modern post-Franco Spain, there are even such things as sports psychologists, who in recent years have delivered their weighty opinions as to why the flashy youths of Spain could not wrap up 90 minutes of dedicated soccer. Among the conclusions were narcissism, maternal overprotection, ambiguity toward winning, blah-blah-blah.

“We have the chance to break this horrible statistic for Spain,” said Iker Casillas, the Spanish goalkeeper and captain, as quoted on UEFA.com before the match. For three weeks, Casillas — still only 27 after making his debut eight years ago — had the charmed look of an athlete who would do nothing wrong. 

On Sunday, Spain was so dominant that even the match statistics, usually meaningless, reflected what our eyes and common sense told us: Spain led in the categories that reflect aggression and skill: shots on goal, 7-1; shots wide, 5-2; corner kicks, 7-4. 

Finally, Spanish fans knew euphoria. I personally was in contact with euphoria in New York, partly because of the grilled lamb and stuffed date tapas at La Boqueria on West 19th Street, but also because of Spanish fans who shouted “Arriba!” (Charge!) when Spain moved the ball up the field. 

Our group included Reggie Williams, who played linebacker for the Cincinnati Bengals, who lost to the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowls XVI and XXIII. In New York while preparing for a second knee transplant, and wearing a yellow and blue jersey from the Monterrey Tigres of Mexico, Williams said he appreciated the passion of soccer, a sport he never played.

“No looking-around time,” Williams said, observing his patrons barely daring to take their eyes off the screen to spear a forkful of tortilla or sausage. 

Torres, who joined Liverpool last season after six full seasons at Atlético Madrid, is 6 feet 1 inch and 172 pounds but looks like a stripling. He made the play of the game, taking a pass from Xavi Hernández, controlling the smaller German defender, Philipp Lahm, then racing past Lahm to flick the ball over the keeper, Jens Lehmann. 

In the second half, when any rational soccer fan expected a comeback from the German players in the white and black uniforms, Williams said, “Now is the time when desperation takes over.” In his sport of specialists, Williams had been pulled to the sideline as Joe Montana threw a touchdown pass in the final minute to win Super Bowl XXIII in 1989.

Spain had the offense Sunday, repelling Germany and racing right back on the attack again, never making that one mistake its fans must have been dreading.

This team did not seem weighed down by the old regional differences that traditionally filtered onto the national team, when coaches felt the need to represent Basques, Catalans, Castilians, Galicians, Asturians, Andalusians, etc. Sometimes unfortunate players who botched a penalty kick or made a defensive gaffe were judged by their region.

Unity on the field was also important. The Spanish coach, Luis Aragonés, selected this squad for speed and firepower, leaving off the mainstay, Raúl of Real Madrid. Going on 70, Aragonés somehow got the Spanish players to work together. 

The symbol of the match was Michael Ballack, Germany’s captain, who almost did not play because of a calf injury, having to leave the field for minutes because he was bleeding near the eye. Torres never stopped playing physically until he was shown a yellow card for hitting an opponent with his head, and then he was replaced in the 78th minute.

Somehow, our party of five managed to eat every last morsel of flan, while all around us Spanish fans were cheering, just like the fans in Vienna, and no doubt all the regions of Spain. Pablo Casals came and went. Salvador Dalí came and went. And finally Spain won the big match and the entire nation spoke the same language: “Olé! Olé!”

