Back a couple of millenniums ago, the Greeks used to call a truce whenever the athletes were competing at Ancient Olympia. Nowadays we have a modern version of the Olympic truce. It is called the Beijing shutdown.

As a gesture to the lungs of visitors, the powers in Beijing announced Monday that they were stopping much of the construction within sight of the Olympic complex, and also some automobile traffic in contemporary consumer-happy Beijing.

Never mind that the gesture is mostly symbolic, since much of the pollution comes from cities upwind of the Olympic city, carried by the sandy wind that has been blowing off the Gobi Desert since before humans invented synchronized swimming and all these other weird sports.

But the Olympics have other problems. Recent articles in The New York Times have backed up the suspicion that many track and field athletes have been using illegal drugs to get their Olympian boost. Marion Jones is in jail, her relay teammates are being stripped of their honors, and the International Olympic Committee is hesitant to award consolation prizes to anybody whose test samples may be kicking around some laboratory.

It’s a dirty business, and the professionalism that flourished under Juan Antonio Samaranch is to blame. No, the television networks and corporate sponsors are to blame. No, we all are to blame for pretending we didn’t know. But is any of this a reason for apocalyptic impulses to shut it all down? These impending — and I choose the word carefully — Summer Games are currently the target of people who rightfully protest policies in Darfur, Tibet, Xinjiang and Chinese labor camps, or laogai.

It frightens me to be in agreement with President Bush on anything, but I have to agree with him that any boycott of the opening ceremony on Aug. 8 would be counterproductive, a slap in the face, for what? Better the president and other world leaders should belatedly learn how to conduct diplomacy and draw attention to Beijing’s poor record in human rights and not use an overblown sports jamboree to cover up for their failures. 



Every time I hear talk of boycotting ceremonies or canceling the Olympic Games, I find myself strangely defensive of the Games, as pretentious and bloated and dishonest as they may be. 

In an essay in the Week in Review of The New York Times on Sunday, Buzz Bissinger, who has enlightened us about high school football and major league baseball, advocated shutting down the Games, citing one abuse or another in each set of Games for decades. 

The reason he gave that the 1996 Games were tainted was a bomb that went off in Centennial Park, killing an innocent bystander. There were a lot of critical things one could say about those T-Shirt Shack Games, which, as it turned out, were probably acquired through “gifts” to I.O.C. delegates and their wives. However, to cite a bomb by an American sociopath in 1996 or Palestinian terrorists in Munich in 1972 seems a bit backward. 

In reality, those Atlanta Games in 1996 gave two blessings to the world. The first was Samaranch’s very real support for female athletes like the softball team of Dr. Dot Richardson and the soccer team of Michelle Akers and their worthy competitors. The other came in the opening ceremony when Muhammad Ali, once reviled in his homeland as a draft dodger and Muslim convert, emerged on a platform to light the Olympic flame. 

I would not trade the success of the women or the honor to Ali for any reflex action to shut down the Olympics. One of Bissinger’s many good points is the abuse of power by corporate sponsors. However, in one notable case, an Olympic sponsor kicked the Games right in their pompous fanny.

When the bribery scandal hit a few years before the 2002 Winter Games in Salt Lake City, the most prophetic voice from the corporate world was that of David D’Alessandro, the chief executive of John Hancock Financial Services. He basically warned the I.O.C. to clean up the mess made by the good burghers of Utah and the dozens of avaricious members whose votes were for hire — or else D’Alessandro would take his corporate sponsorship away from the Olympics faster than you can say, “On your mark, get set, go.” 


D’Alessandro was not being moralistic, he said. He was merely protecting his company. He has since moved on from John Hancock. Some day the Olympics might find another visionary leader from corporate America. It’s not impossible.

The Olympics are always tainted. The grubby corporate presence should be banished from the torch relay, if it is to survive at all. I suspect the Chinese will try to lock down Beijing from protest in August, but that Darfur and Tibet and Xinjiang will be a presence there. The answer, my friends — as the Pulitzer troubadour might have said — is blowing in the hot, nasty Gobi wind. For all of us to run away and hide doesn’t make sense, either. 

