The Canadian fans tried. They booed Derek Jeter during introductions, which is downright un-American. A few fans heckled Chipper Jones by chanting his nickname, missing the point that Mets fans harass their ancient tormentor by his given name, Larry (which he loves).

The trouble began for Team Canada right after the anthems, when the Americans in their home white uniforms trotted out to their positions, right here in the True North Strong and Free.

“That was a little strange,” said Jimmy Rollins, who was on the bench at the start. “What did they do, flip a coin?

Not exactly. Under the rules of the World Baseball Classic — we will have this down pat midway through the century — the higher-seeded team is the home team in the first game. In this case, that was the Americans.

Even the official scorecard, distributed in the press box at Rogers Centre, had the Canadians listed as the home team, on the bottom half of the sheet. The whole game was off-balance as a result — a sense of not knowing up from down. 

“I didn’t know until today,” said Russell Martin of Canada. “A couple of guys were asking what was going on.”

The day started strange in San Juan, where the Netherlands stunned the Dominican Republic, and it continued strange with Cap’n Derek of the Yankees loping out to shortstop to start a game in Canada, but that’s the way it works. The fans who drove or walked or took the commuter train, just like Canada’s designated hitter, Joey Votto, brought life and energy to the dome. But this is not 2006.

It only got worse. By the rules of the tournament, the bottom of the seventh was celebrated with the traditional stretch, with fans singing along to the Neil Diamond song “Sweet Caroline” — a ritual borrowed from the Boston Red Sox.

Canadian fans, with their faces painted red, raised index fingers in jolly cadence. Then out of the dugout popped Dustin Pedroia of the Red Sox, this touchy-feely moment having served to bring up the Americans for another turn at bat. 

By that time, the whole day was disjointed for the Canadians. The Americans avoided the embarrassment of the first Classic, when they were upset by Canada. This time, the Yanks barely held on for a 6-5 victory to advance to a game Sunday night against powerful Venezuela, which defeated Italy, 7-0. 

This was clearly the game of the tournament for Canadian fans, with 42,314 in the dome, hoping for a Miracle on Ersatz.

The Canadians tried. Because a rash of aches and pains seems to have struck the pitching arms of most Canadian major league pitchers, the home nation (not the home team) started Mike Johnson, who had a won-lost record of 20-2 last season, albeit in South Korea. On the plane ride north from Florida, Johnson had studied videos of the American hitters in a session with his catcher, Russell Martin of the Dodgers.

“He had a great changeup; he had a great curveball when I had him in Baltimore,” Davey Johnson, the American skipper and no relation, said, referring to 1997.

This being 2009, Mike Johnson gave up a checked-swing double down the right-field line to Jeter in the first inning. The next time he faced him, Johnson tossed a slow, looping curve inside, moving Jeter back from the plate. The pitch was not nearly as ferocious as some of the hummers Jason Varitek dials up during Yankees-Red Sox games, which are decibels beyond anything this Classic is likely to produce.

The game did have its moments of country hardball. In the second inning, Adam Dunn dumped the Canadian second baseman, Pete Orr, on a force play at second base. And in the seventh, the United States pitcher Scott Shields threw rather high and tight to Jason Bay, earning a midseason stare.

Ultimately, the Yanks had more pitching than the Canadians, getting three innings out of Jake Peavy and a string of single innings from six others.

By the end, the folks had nothing better to do than perform the wave, with the Americans batting in the bottom of the eighth. It suggested boredom in the face of inevitability.

Nobody can be sure how the Americans will do in this tournament, which does not seem to have struck a chord in American fans, who are caught up in the saga of A-Rod’s hip and are waiting for their college basketball brackets next week. The Classic has not exactly made it yet.

However, if the Canadians had pulled off another little miracle, their fans might have levitated the roof of the dome. They came close in the ninth, when Votto sent the tying run to second with his fourth hit. 

“In a perfect world, we would have beaten them with a walk-off home run,” Martin said, with a Gallic shrug suggesting that he knows this is not a perfect world. 

The day had begun off kilter when Jeter trotted out to shortstop, and Canada never quite recovered.

