I read the news today, oh, boy. My soccer café in Greenwich Village is gone. Shut down. Never to open again. This is a tragedy of worldwide dimensions. Sports fans everywhere have that one joint where they watch Santos or Ole Miss or the Nippon Ham Fighters. 

My place for soccer was — and I choke on the word “was” — L’Angolo, Italian for “corner,” at the northwest corner of Thompson and Houston streets in the Village. It was a hangout for Italian tifosi (fans) of all regions, all dialects, all teams.

Steve Nash spent his summer vacation of 2006 watching the World Cup from Germany in the funky confines of L’Angolo. Italian journalists hung out there. During a key Serie A match, it was great to watch Italians rooting for Juventus or A.C. Milan, scowling at each other. But when Italy would call up its national team, they would unite, true patriots, to root for the Azzurri. And from time to time, a group of us would congregate down at the end of the bar for a Champions League match.


I loved being a wannabe Italian. I would overdose on cappuccinos just so I could place another order with the beautiful Paola. (Where has she gone?) And between halves of the match, I would listen to the glories of Sicily from our host, Pino DiBartolo, who served the most delicious arancini, an orange-flavored rice ball, and cannoli that he said was flown in from Palermo. It was a home away from home. I also learned a lot about soccer from people who grew up with it, the way I grew up with baseball. 

In 1999, some German fans and English fans coexisted in the neutral site of L’Angolo for the Champions League final. When Manchester United scored two goals in the final moments for a 2-1 victory over Bayern Munich, Massimo Lopes Pegna of Gazzetta dello Sport and I spent half an hour talking the German guys out of throwing themselves under the crosstown bus. 

Now L’Angolo is gone — not the first Greenwich Village landmark to go. The Waverly movie theater on Sixth Avenue (mentioned in the musical “Hair”) now has some geek corporate name. The Lion’s Head, where my friend Vic Ziegel hung out, is long gone. Pete Hamill and Robert F. Kennedy were regulars there, too, and the joint once employed a young waitress named Jessica Lange.

New York real estate being what it is, the landlord was putting the squeeze on Pino. Given the yuppification of the city, you cannot have too many nail shops and Starbucks and boutiques. Con Ed didn’t help Pino by staging its own Big Dig directly in front of L’Angolo for what seemed like years, meaning he could not open the front windows in benign weather. But somehow I thought L’Angolo would survive. 


The other day I sent an e-mail message to Pino to reserve four places for the final on May 21, and Pino wrote back that he has been closed since the end of March (a fine regular I was) and that he is soon leaving for Naples. Florida, that is. Maybe some day there will be a southern L’Angolo with arancini and cannoli, but not with the characters who wandered in off Houston Street — like Maurizio, who claimed the seat directly under the television and pounded the bar at every flubbed pass. Where am I going to yearn to be Italian? Where am I going to order cappuccinos from Paola? Where am I going to watch the Champions League final?

