Every four years, for three short and delightful weeks, I rediscover the pure joy of being a sports fan. I am nowhere near the Euro 2008 soccer tournament being played in Austria and Switzerland, and maybe that’s why I’m having such a wonderful time. 

 
Through the blessing of time zones, this quadrennial tournament always takes place in the midday in New York rather than the middle of the night, like the N.B.A. finals, of which I have not yet witnessed a single call, makeup or legitimate. 

On Friday, I witnessed the agita of Italy’s 1-1 draw with Romania in Zurich, along with my pal Pino DiBartolo, the former proprietor of the now-shuttered L’Angolo in Greenwich Village, my beloved soccer hangout. 

After heroics by both goalkeepers, Italy merely maintained a slim chance of advancing to the knockout round.

“I am suffering,” Mario DelDuca muttered in Italian, at Opal, at 251 East 52nd St., at Second Avenue, in Manhattan, where Paola Beretti, who worked at L’Angolo, is now the day manager. The food was eclectic — I had a delicious rare tuna, and Pino shocked Paola by ordering a hamburger — but the terrible state of fear was indubitably Italian (Mets fans would understand the disillusionment), coming on top of the 3-0 humiliation by the Netherlands in the opener. 

At halftime, DelDuca received a message lamenting the header goal by Luca Toni that had been disallowed because of an offsides call. DelDuca’s messenger said the offsides was “inesistente” — nonexistent — and judging from the replays, I would agree with him. 

On the tube, a bewildered-looking Roberto Donadoni kept throwing in attackers near the end. But his desperate Italy squad had fired its best shots in the first 20 minutes and could not pull out the 3 points for a victory. The Italians won the 2006 World Cup, but in soccer’s grinding calendar, the players have aged in dog years. 

Melodrama like this works well at midday. For the last week, ESPN has been bringing us Cristiano Ronaldo of Portugal, who has developed cold-blooded viciousness and blazing brilliance that are Jordanesque.

I think I love the European Championship because I have never been able to wangle an assignment to cover it. So I associate it with hospitable places and fresh faces romping across the screen. In 1988, I watched the Dutch roll from rainy Wimbledon. In 1992, I saw the captivating Danes from pubs in London. In 2000, I watched the French stun the Italians from my neighbor Ron’s den. And in 2004, I followed the stunning Greeks from pubs in Maastricht in the Netherlands and in Waterloo, Belgium. 

Watching Euro 2008 in Opal with Pino was a contrast to the frenzy of drunken fans, jammed into trains, wearing last week’s T-shirts, anarchy at security checkpoints, and somebody standing up in front of me during a goal, as happened in a World Cup semifinal in 1998. This is more civil.The Euro tournament gets to the point — 16 European teams, over in three weeks rather than the five of the World Cup. It features many familiar uniforms: the orange of the Dutch, the lively blue of the Italians. There are familiar faces on the sideline: the leonine white hair and expressive maestro hands of the Czech coach, Karel Bruckner, who resembles Leonard Bernstein conducting “Ma Vlast”; and the sturdy intensity of the Portuguese coach, Luiz Felipe Scolari, known as Big Phil, who resembles Gene Hackman in “Hoosiers.” 

There are oldies but goodies on the pitch: the lumbering old Jan Koller of the Czechs and the renovated Ruud van Nistelrooy of the Dutch, in real time, in my town.

But the best sight of all is Ronaldo, the gifted pretty boy. Has anybody ever seen him and Alex Rodriguez at the same time? A few years ago, Ronaldo was mostly annoying — unless you happened to be a fan of Portugal or of Manchester United — what with his frosted tufts of hair, his supercilious smirk, his supra-gravitational tendency to flop.

Still only 23, Ronaldo can outmuscle defenders for the ball, dance down the sideline, fire rockets at the goal or bound into the air the way His Airness of Chicago used to do. The other day, he unleashed a delightful little toe-poke of a pass down the left sideline, and he later gave up a pretty sure goal to let a teammate tap home a freebie. Ronaldo is the full package. And in New York, we get to appreciate him at midday, with our eyes still open. Grazie, ESPN.

