This is something that has not happened in 24 years, most of them frustrating. Spain’s national team — La Selección — has disappointed so often, so graphically, so diversely. But on Thursday came the biggest win in a generation.

All the homegrown talent that is the backbone of La Liga, one of the toughest national leagues in the world, came through in the rain in Vienna. The Spaniards wore down Russia, 3-0, in the semifinals of Euro 2008, with their skill and experience topping the Russians’ earlier exuberance.

This is no small victory for Spain to qualify for Sunday’s championship match against Germany in Vienna. It will be the first final for a Spanish team in a world-level tournament since Spain lost to France in Euro 1984. 

In between there have been so many losses way too early in tournaments, often under bizarre circumstances, that made Spanish fans ask exactly why their teams cannot live up to expectations, why their fancy players fold under pressure, why terrible things happen to them.

World soccer fans often get a little crazy when an American like me compares an international situation to our own little local sports. But the best way to describe Spain in American terms is to say that sometimes a hand comes out of nowhere to deflect a ball, the way it happened to the Chicago Cubs in the postseason in 2003. The Cubs have not won a World Series since 1908, and Spain has not won a major tournament since Euro 1964, when it beat the Soviet Union, the spiritual ancestors of Thursday’s losing side.

In between, La Selección has managed to disappoint. Things just happen, and a nation falls silent. I was in Spain in 1982 when La Selección lost. People were indoors watching television — and they never came back out that evening, not even for the traditional stroll or the late dinner. Everything just shut down.

In the 1994 World Cup, Roberto Baggio beat Spain for Italy in the closing minutes in Foxborough, Mass. In the 1998 World Cup, cresting Nigeria just plain outhustled the all-stars from La Liga, in the French city of Nantes. In 2002 an Egyptian referee disallowed not one but two Spanish goals against the host team, South Korea, that looked perfectly legal to most eyes, particularly Spanish ones.


Demonstrably the luck is changing, ever since Spain survived 120 scoreless minutes against its chosen nemesis, Italy, in the quarterfinals of this tournament, and Iker Casillas made enough key saves for the shootout victory.

On Thursday, the Spaniards displayed the meshed talent that has often gone missing in crucial matches. They showed individual flashes in the first half, wearing down the Russians, coached by Guus Hiddink, the Dutch master. In the second half, Luis Aragonés’s squad produced crisp outlet passes, dashing crosses, alert strikes and bing-bing-bing goals by Xavi Hernández in the 50th minute, by Daniel Güiza in the 73rd and by David Silva in the 82nd. 

Now La Selección meets Germany, whose defense is more experienced, more purposeful, than the Russian defense. But if Spain can run that offense as it did in the second half on Thursday, then this could truly be La Selección’s year, or even its generation. (I watched Thursday at Opal on Second Avenue, but I’m thinking tapas might be in order Sunday.)

Many Americans still have a hard time understanding this national anguish over any sport, but we are slowly building our tradition. Major League Soccer has sent its homegrown young star, Jozy Altidore, to Villarreal in La Liga, and welcomes older players who have been out there.

On Sunday at noon on the East Coast — as a prelude to the Euro 2008 final on ABC — M.L.S. will present a match featuring David Beckham of England and the Los Angeles Galaxy and Marcelo Gallardo of Argentina and D.C. United, who were on opposing sides in the heat of a World Cup Round of 16 match in 1998. Technically, they were never on the same field at the same time, since Beckham was ejected for a foolish kick before Gallardo came on as a sub. Sunday they will meet.

For now, the United States cannot duplicate, cannot possibly imagine, the deep national complex of Spain, with its generation of hopes and letdowns from La Selección. The United States has this agony ahead of it.

