In a world that frequently disappoints, there is something refreshing about a sports tournament with four deserving semifinalists of seething ambition. I am referring to the soccer championship, Euro 2008, very much a fixture in the United States, via good old ESPN (and its marvelous addition, the Scottish ex-player with the burr and the enthusiasm, Andy Gray).


Even the shootouts have tended to be compelling rather than miserably anticlimactic. What fan, hyperventilating in den or pub, will forget the great televised close-up of Gianluigi Buffon of Italy tapping Iker Casillas of Spain on the cheek last Sunday before these two worthy opponents went out to take their educated guesses between the fickle posts?

All our American tournaments should be so good, should produce a quartet of teams that willed themselves forward, past favorites, past tradition, past jinxes, past form, beyond exhaustion, beyond injuries? But that has been the drama leading to the semifinals from Mittel Europa — Germany versus Turkey in Basel, Switzerland, on Wednesday, Russia versus Spain in Vienna on Thursday.


Surprise and delight are the legacy of this quadrennial tournament that takes place on the counterpoint of the World Cup. The champions are often squads that did not quite exist in the same shape in the previous World Cup and may never be a factor at the next World Cup — the rollicking Danes in 1992, the gallant Greeks in 2004 and so on.

These semifinals begin with Germany versus Turkey, surely one of the more intimate and complicated relationships in Europe. All of us at the World Cup in 2006 will attest to the kind smiles and hard work of people of Turkish ancestry, scratching to send money back to their families. There are calls for Germans and Turks to watch the match in amity in Germany while the two squads settle matters on the field.

It is hard to ever think of Germany as an outsider, but in 2006, it used its fervent national support to achieve third place, and the team is still not considered back at its old standards. Yet the Germans are among the great constants of world sport. They never quit. 

The tooth-gnashing face of German soccer in the quarterfinal was located just below the whitish-blond thatch of the tall Bastian Schweinsteiger, who had been suspended for the previous match and came back with a fury that was almost frightening. He scored one goal and assisted on two while dispatching flashy Portugal. 

Turkey outlasted the Czech Republic and Croatia, but is now so depleted by suspensions and injuries that it is said to be preparing its third goalkeeper for potential field duty. Germany should win. Don’t tell that to the Turks. 

Russia has been another revelation in this tournament, getting better match by match, as if the new money and methodology and aspiration in emerging Russia had been transfused legally, match by match. 

Under the wily Guus Hiddink, the Dutchman who has now upgraded four national squads (previously, the Netherlands, South Korea and Australia), the Russians are playing inspired soccer, having worn down the Dutch on Saturday. The Russian defense may not yet be sophisticated enough for Spain, which on Sunday spent 120 minutes against Italy, the best defense in the world — tangled up in blue, so to speak.


In this Euro 2008, Spain has shown more determination than it has in recent decades. Who will forget Roberto Baggio scoring late on Spain in the 1994 World Cup quarterfinal, and Luis Enrique of Spain leaving the field with blood streaming from his broken nose after Mauro Tassotti of Italy elbowed him out of sight of the referee? (Tassotti was caught on camera and ultimately suspended for eight matches.) 

Against Spain last Sunday, Italy tried to fend off Spain’s offense, resorting to the diving, the shirt-grabbing, the foot-stomping and, if all else failed, the feigned heart attack. Italy kept Spain scoreless for 120 minutes, but Spain clearly would have been the victor in style points, if such a thing existed in this mercurial sport. Ultimately, Spain prevailed on penalty kicks — a great tribute to Spanish heart — after not having beaten Italy in full international competition in 88 years.

Throughout that match, Andy Gray was having conniptions on ESPN, blasting the German referee for not catching more of the shenanigans. Gray has been the extra revelation of Euro 2008. A high-scoring Scottish national a few decades back, he is now a commentator in the English Premiership. He does not blather nonsense at our uneducated American ears, but rather explains why a striker botched his chance in goal mouth or why a keeper was out of position on a corner kick. 

Gray knows the game with the acerbic high standards of a Tim McCarver or Joe Morgan of baseball or Phil Simms of the N.F.L. or the great Eddie Westfall of Islanders telecasts, who used to say, “Jiggs, there’s no place for this in hockey.” 

Anyway, welcome to our shores and our ears, Mr. Gray. Don’t wait for Euro 2012 to return.

