Brace yourself for a season of nostalgia — lush, treacly nostalgia. Everything that happens at Yankee Stadium, or Shea Stadium, for that matter, will be the last of this or the last of that.


Monday’s rainout at Yankee Stadium, for example, figures to be the last rainout of the actual opening day at the intermediate Yankee Stadium (1976-2008), not to be confused with the original Yankee Stadium (1923-1973). However, the rainout will probably not be the last postponement at the current big ball yard in the Bronx. It’s a long season. 

All this looming nostalgia is tied in to the projected moves of the Yankees and the Mets to expensive — and smaller; why smaller? — ballparks essentially a loud foul from the existing ones.

“It’s 100 yards away — not too far,” Derek Jeter, the Yankees’ captain and resident realist, said before the Yankees’ opener was postponed until Tuesday evening, turning what would have been an event into just another miserable night game in early April.

The real question is how much people should buy into the remembrance of things past. I can see the public getting wrought up about the disappearance of parkland in the Bronx under the watch of Mayor Bloomberg, for the greater good of the Steinbrenners. I can see lamenting the possible disappearance of automobile chop shops in Flushing. But the teams are not actually going anywhere. On television it’s pretty much going to look the same. 


In his role as captain, Jeter tried to talk about the historic move slightly northward. Jeter showed even better verbal change of direction than he does at shortstop, saying: “Everybody’s looking forward to the new Yankee Stadium. It’s going to be a special one.” Then he said, “I don’t think it’s hit me yet.” And he added about the current Yankee Stadium, “This is definitely a special place.” 

Well, there are lots of special places, and even they come and go. England has built a new national soccer stadium, still called Wembley, featuring creature comforts unknown to soccer fans who for generations stood cheek to jowl in the dense terraces close enough to crush each other to death and sang a cappella. Those were the good old days. Now they probably serve sushi rather than bangers and mash in the luxury boxes in Wembley. 

Talk about uprooting a tradition: Ry Cooder’s lovely theme CD from 2005, “Chavez Ravine,” deals with the transformation of a Los Angeles hillside from a quirky neighborhood into a ballpark, circa 1962, to accommodate a baseball team that violently abandoned the borough of Brooklyn. 

Cooder’s CD has everything from sadness for vanished nights to political anger, yet it ends with Cooder declaring that “2nd base, right over there/ I see grandma in her rocking chair,” and adding, more or less kindly, “Baseball been very good to me.” I listened to Cooder’s songs last Saturday when the constant Red Sox were playing the transplanted Dodgers in the Coliseum, where the Dodgers had played from 1958 through 1961 while the last of Cooder’s subjects were being evicted from the ravine. 

As a baseball man, I admit to feeling conflicted about the new stadium that opened in Washington on Sunday night. The schools and the hospitals are a nightmare for the disenfranchised and poor of the District of Columbia, most of whom probably cannot afford major league tickets, but somehow I found myself checking out the angles and fence heights and views of the new place, glad Washington has a team. 

The game ended with Ryan Zimmerman’s shot clearing the fence in the bottom of the ninth. Maybe Zimmerman will become the Derek Jeter of D.C. He’s only 23. Twelve years from now, I bet he’ll remember that shot. 


Derek being Derek, he professed not to remember what he did on his first opening game in 1996, except that it snowed a bit. Courtesy of that invaluable Web site retrosheet.org, I discovered that Jeter batted ninth that day, behind his pal Gerald Williams, going 1 for 3, scoring a run, with a walk and a strikeout in a 7-3 victory over the Royals. 

The Yankees got a home run that day from their No. 2 hitter, a catcher named Girardi, and the starting pitcher was Andy Pettitte, currently on the disabled list but due to pitch Saturday. Batting sixth for the Royals that day was none other than Johnny Damon, now the Yankees’ left fielder. 

Unless he hydroplanes in a puddle or something, Jeter will make his 12th opening day start, passing Phil Rizzuto among Yankees shortstops. He missed opening day in 2001 because of injuries. 

Jeter added that he has visited the new Stadium, saying the builders are doing “a great job” and that the new place “has the look of the old Stadium.” But maintaining the historically high level of the Yankees is “up to us as players,” Jeter added. 

“It still seems like it’s far off,” he concluded. Quite right. How about a moratorium on nostalgia until late September?

