They are the odd couple of Olympic sports, bonded by three bases and home plate. Women’s softball and men’s baseball have been voted off the Olympic island after this August’s Summer Games in Beijing. 

Their biggest crime? Being perceived as regional sports that eat up a lot of space in the Olympic movement that is trying to slim down. Both sports also suffer because they are dominated by the United States, not exactly the most popular nation on the globe at this moment.

Although the United States has won all three Olympic softball gold medals, other nations will challenge soon, insisted Don Porter, the president of the 130-nation International Softball Federation. Porter was in New York on Wednesday as part of his lobbying effort to get softball reinstated for the 2016 Games, wherever they may be. 

The unfair part is that the softball and baseball constituencies are vastly different. For the women, the Olympic gold medal is as big as it gets. 

Baseball doesn’t need the Olympics the way the women do. Most of the male baseball players — except the Cubans, who have won three of four Olympic gold medals — have huge contracts and other championships. Now they have the World Baseball Classic, a better event than the Olympic baseball tournament will ever be. Baseball also carries the woeful image of bulked-up, rich and obnoxious major leaguers like Barry Bonds, Roger Clemens and José Canseco.

“The members are frustrated with baseball,” said Donna de Varona, the Olympic swimming champion and television commentator with vast contacts in the International Olympic Committee.

De Varona is volunteering her expertise to Back Softball, an organization seeking the return of the sport to the Olympics. She recalled how her softball-playing daughter, Joanna Pinto, now 18, heard of the exclusion of softball in 2005, and said, “Go fix it, Mom.”

The women wave the flag of gender equality, the banner of wholesomeness. Porter carries around a greeting card containing the earnest script of a teenage girl from North Carolina, thanking him for his effort to get the sport back in the Olympics. 

Porter still seems shocked by the 52-to-52 vote by I.O.C. delegates in Singapore in July 2005, which knocked softball out for 2012. Softball needed a majority vote to stay.

“We thought we had it,” Porter said Wednesday.

Baseball went down by a vote of 54 to 50, and, like softball, must now spend millions of dollars in lobbying toward the next I.O.C. vote at the end of 2009 in Copenhagen. 

The exclusion seems particularly unfair to the women, who burst into the Summer Games of 1996, led by appealing new faces like Dot Richardson, the slugging doctor. The excitement was a tribute to Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president who had been shortsighted about drugs but a visionary about women in the Olympics. Now retired, Samaranch has lent his name to Back Softball.


Samaranch’s successor, Jacques Rogge, had his own priorities, feeling that the Games were becoming too big, forcing host cities to build too many stadiums, too many athletes’ dormitories. 

The Athens Games had 10,625 competitors, down slightly from the peak of 10,651 in Sydney in 2000, after the totals had climbed throughout the 20th century. Baseball and softball were obvious targets, what with baseball’s eight squads of 24 players and softball’s eight squads of 15 — a total of 312 competitors. 

Needing a two-thirds vote for acceptance, the I.O.C. members did not see fit to approve any new sports from among squash, karate, seven-man rugby, golf and roller sports. But in 2009, applicant sports can be included by a simple majority vote, said Emmanuelle Moreau of the communications department of the I.O.C., in a telephone interview from Lausanne, Switzerland. 

Harvey Schiller, the president of the International Baseball Federation, points out that baseball has not had a problem with strict Olympic drug testing. Neither has softball. 

Baseball, with 115 member nations, has produced uneven Olympic tournaments because Major League Baseball will not send players during the season or even shut down for a few weeks the way the N.H.L. has done during recent Winter Games. 

Besides, baseball created its own high-level competition with the first World Baseball Classic in 2006, when Japan beat the state-supported amateurs from Cuba in the final, the best possible result for international validity. 

“We need stars,” Schiller said, suggesting that M.L.B. could allow a few stars to be airlifted into the Olympic semifinals and finals — which seems patently unfair to players who qualified their nations for the medal round.


Samaranch set all of this clutter in motion by including millionaire professionals in what was formerly known as amateur sport. There is probably no way to go backward, but the Summer Games could do without the hybrid soccer tournament, the closest parallel to the makeshift baseball competition. 

While the television networks and sponsors would probably never feature women’s softball as an Olympic mainstay, Samaranch was on the right track in bringing women’s sports into the Games. Porter and de Varona must now persuade the I.O.C. members to do the right thing and reinstate softball. 

