When Chipper Jones was not quite 8, he was watching the Winter Games on television and saw the most amazing sight: the plucky skaters from the United States upset the mighty Soviet Union in ice hockey in what was immediately called the Miracle on Ice. 

For the little boy in Florida in 1980, Olympic hockey was a foreign sport, but the idea of knocking off the world’s powerhouse seemed pretty cool to him. 

Twenty-six years later, there was the grownup Chipper Jones, starring in a remake of that fabled surprise — except that he was playing the role of Viacheslav Fetisov or Sergei Makarov. 

Jones and his American teammates were on the losing side of an 8-6 victory by Canada in the first round of the first World Baseball Classic, in 2006. He did not think that was cool. 

The Americans have had three years to live it down, and the Canadians have had three years to exult about sticking it to the Yanks — except that no Canadian would ever do something as bad-mannered as gloat. 

“I think we snuck up on them,” Justin Morneau, one of the boppers on the Canadian team, said, ever so properly, on Friday. 

Jones is back, along with Derek Jeter, along with three pitchers from a team that is mostly remembered for losing to Canada. Now the United States gets its chance again, this time in the hub of Canada, at 2 p.m. Saturday under the dome at the Rogers Centre.

That surprise in 2006 gave instant credibility to this flawed tournament, which is operating on the most slender of margins. The Classic is essentially a response by baseball to being chucked out of the London Olympics in 2012, which itself was an attempt to pare down the cumbersome Summer Games but also a response to baseball’s dirty drug generation. 

Trying to stay in the public eye, baseball is hoping to capture some of the excitement of the soccer World Cup, the best sports event on the planet, it says here, and the championships in hockey, basketball, cricket and rugby that captivate big chunks of the world. 

The Classic is not going to make it on the dreadful timing of early March, smack in the middle of spring training, or charm many fans with the limited pitch counts for starting pitchers. A high percentage of healthy players hear the call in Latin and Asian countries, but some American players still do not get it.

Jeter, 34, the captain of the Yankees, said on Friday: “If I am going to be honest with you, the first time around, you’d hear a guy saying, ‘Well, you get an opportunity to get out of spring training for a couple of weeks and go play.’ I think after everyone had the opportunity to see what the tournament was like, a lot of players were talking about it the last couple of years, really looking forward to it.”

Jones, 36, the untitled leader of the Braves, had said that some players on the 2006 team had egos. He explained it Friday: “There are a lot of talented ballplayers and whatnot, everybody wanted to be starting, and everybody wanted to be playing nine, but it didn’t happen that way. And that was probably a big reason for our downfall.”

The United States emerged from the first round while Canada did not, but was beaten by South Korea and Mexico in the second round. This might have been the best thing that could have happened to the Classic, because it proved that the Yanks could not saunter and sulk into the Classic and win it. 

This time the Canadians are home. Many of the top pitchers are hurt, so they are starting Mike Johnson, who last pitched in the majors in 2001 and has been toiling in the Asian professional leagues. The American starter, Jake Peavy, not trying to be snide, referred to the Canada starter as “Mike, is it?” It is. 

On Friday, Jones and Jeter made sure that everybody remembered Canada has some potent bats. They were respectful and courteous — and probably, deep down, just a little nervous that 2006 could happen all over again. 

The Canadians are home, surrounded by familiar accents and familiar hockey references. Nobody was more at home than Joey Votto of the Reds, who slept in his own bed in nearby Brampton on Thursday night, then took the commuter train to the dome. Nobody recognized him, he said. 

A Canadian reporter noted that the national icon Sidney Crosby, age 21, would never take public transit when the Pittsburgh Penguins play in Toronto. Votto, 25, said that if he saw the young hockey star on a train, he would ask for Crosby’s autograph. 

“I think I do have his autograph, actually,” Votto added.

Votto was taking the unassuming pose of the Canadians, who would not mind sneaking up on the Yanks all over again. 

That’s why Chipper Jones and Derek Jeter are here — to remind their temporary teammates that upsets are cool when you are a child watching them on the tube but not so cool when you are an American, on the wrong side of one.

