When Pete Sampras played Roger Federer in Madison Square Garden a year ago, Serena Williams sent a message to the promoter: Hey, what about us? 

Astute businessman that he is, Jerry Solomon replied, oddly enough, that that is exactly what he had in mind for next time.

Having asked in, Serena made the most of a one-night appearance in New York on Monday night. She beat her sister, Venus, 6-4, 6-3, to win something called the Billie Jean King Cup and, more important, to raise memories of when tennis was a regular event at the Garden.

Welcome back. At the end of a major snowstorm, live tennis returned to the Garden on Monday evening — churning legs, flailing arms, squeaking sneakers, the whole thing. 

Suddenly, there they were, four of the world’s best players. Serena beat Ana Ivanovic, 6-3, in a one-set semifinal and Venus beat Jelena Jankovic, 6-4, in the other semifinal before a crowd announced as 12,026.

“I’ve watched so much tennis from Madison Square Garden,” Serena said after outlasting her sister. “The fans in New York deserve to see top women’s tennis.”

As the center of the universe — just ask us — New York also used to be the center of tennis, holding both the men’s and women’s season-ending tournaments in the Garden.

The men’s tournament was an odd round-robin, susceptible to odd bits of tanking and opponent-ducking, but all the great ones played here through 1989, when the tournament started floating around the world.

The women’s tournament lasted through 2000, until it went off in search of what it had all along in the Garden — an identity.

“It was like coming home,” Martina Navratilova said Monday via e-mail from Paris, where she had been hitting tennis balls for the fun of it. “You knew the court, where the lights were and where the toss was going to be in relationship to the lights — different in singles from doubles. You knew where certain fans sat — same seats every year. 

“There was such a familiarity with the place,” Navratilova added. “Plenty of room to run and scramble, unlike most indoor courts, and of course the banners — the Knicks and the Rangers — very cool to be in a place where so many sporting greats competed, even stay in the same locker rooms and showers as they used over the years. Year after year, adding a little bit of history to the building. Very cool.”

Those old season-ending tournaments were the stage for sweet farewells, first for Navratilova, later for Steffi Graf. Like Brigadoon emerging from the mists, their separate banners were hanging from the rafters Monday evening, raising the question — why not all the time?

One night a year is not enough, but Monday was the night, with former President Bill Clinton praising Billie Jean King in a ceremony before the final match. Olympic figure-skating medalists Sarah Hughes and Nancy Kerrigan made an appearance, as did Rosie Casals, King’s colleague from the pioneer days of women’s professional tennis. 

“Billie Jean King is one of my role models,” Serena Williams said earlier Monday. “Not only is she a role model for tennis, but she transcended that and she went to be a role model for just women’s sports in general.” 

In the spirit of King, many tennis centers around the United States showed the match on HBO television, inviting children to visit the courts and register for youth leagues. 

Tennis flits around the globe, popping up in every time zone, blunting the minds of most players. However, the four participants seemed to get the picture that this was not just one more cash-cow exhibition somewhere out there in the world. 

“I’ve always wanted to play there and never thought I would actually have a chance in my career to play, once that tournament was removed,” Serena Williams said the other day. Her sister had played in the old championship once in 1999, and seemed glad to be back, at least until she lost the first set. 

The two Serbian players were, as usual, responsive to events around them. 

“This is my first time here,” Ivanovic said. “I was actually hoping it would snow because we always play in places where it’s very warm. So it’s fun also to get freezed a little bit. I’ve been out every morning. It’s really nice. The view of the Central Park, it’s amazing. I’m really enjoying my time.”

Jankovic, whose smiles and sportsmanship light up the hurly-burly of the United States Open every summer, was also enthused about the Garden. 

“Playing in a night match in front of New York crowds is very, very exciting and quite a unique experience,” she said. She talked about how much she loves New York for its restaurants and shopping, and added, “Usually I come when it’s warm. So it’s really different.”

The model for Monday’s event was the exhibition last March, when the retired Pete Sampras shambled out to play Roger Federer in an exhibition. Weakened from mononucleosis, Federer eked out a 6-3, 6-7 (4), 7-6 (6), victory before a sellout crowd of 19,690. 

Monday’s event did not quite have the full-house, ready-to-rumble atmosphere of Federer-Sampras. Maybe there were just too many Williamses. But tennis returned to the Garden. Welcome back.

