“Say hello to Denis for me, if you see him.”


 

This was Ulf Nilsson, speaking from Stockholm — the other half of the famous feud that never existed, except in the fans’ minds. 

On Wednesday, it will be 30 years since Denis Potvin collided with Nilsson at Madison Square Garden, breaking Nilsson’s right ankle and curtailing his career.

Never once has Nilsson suggested that it was anything but a normal nasty hit, the kind hockey players respect. But the fracture has been commemorated by fans in the upper seats in the Garden, who revive the notorious Potvin chant during Rangers games.

The chant proclaims the sentiment that Potvin stinks — present tense — although Potvin has not skated in the N.H.L. since 1988. 


Through the vast whimsy of the schedule-maker, Potvin will be making a visit to the Garden on Thursday as the longtime color broadcaster of the Florida Panthers. The Rangers will have a new coach, John Tortorella, after Tom Renney was fired Monday.

Those oh-so-hip Rangers fans will know Potvin is in the building and no doubt will serenade him. Truth is, the chant would be echoing during a midday skate at the empty Garden. It is in the musty air trapped in the Garden — a tribute to the long, if inflamed, memories of Rangers fans, all fans.

This is the way it works in the paying portion of the stands, where fans need resentment to truly enjoy the sport. Yankees fans hated Johnny Damon when he played for the Red Sox sporting his Old Testament beard and hair. It did no good for reporters who actually got to meet Damon to note that he was one of the nicer guys in any locker room. The fans wanted to hate him, and hate him they did — until he took the money and the haircut as part of the Yankees Kool-Aid package. 

In these days of free agency, there are few cases of institutional hatreds. The guy you collide with today could be dressing next to you tomorrow. Athletes are mostly lodge brothers. 

In 1979, Potvin and Nilsson were locked into one of the better hockey rivalries as the glamorous urban Rangers were trying to hold off the emerging expansion team from the Long Island boondocks. 

Potvin was the hard-hitting young defenseman with the Islanders, and Nilsson was the smooth center for the Rangers, one of those so-called “chicken Swedes” who were too mature and too skillful to be intimidated. Hard hits were part of the game.

“With about 1:20 left in the period, Rangers fans saw a sight to enrage them, when Potvin splattered Nilsson against the boards in the left corner,” Lawrie Mifflin, now an editor at The New York Times, wrote in The Daily News that night. 

When Nilsson’s right skate caught in a crevice in the ice, the leg took the full weight of Potvin’s hit.

“He was a great hockey player,” Nilsson said the other day from Stockholm, where he works for a Web and television company called Qbrick. 

“He was always fair,” Nilsson added. “But the ice was never great in the Garden because they had basketball and other events. My foot got caught. It was a freak thing. The Ranger fans were so frustrated.”

The strange thing was that the Rangers eliminated the Islanders in the semifinals that year before losing to Montreal in the Stanley Cup finals, and maybe Rangers fans felt they had some measure of revenge for the broken ankle. But Nilsson’s career petered out by 1983, as the Islanders won four Stanley Cups, leaving Rangers fans nothing better to do than invent the Potvin chant.

They used the cadence of “Let’s Go Band,” and at the end chanted the part about Potvin. After other uglier versions were included, the Garden stopped playing the tune, but volunteers still seize upon a lull in the action to whistle a signal that ignites Rangers fans, some of whom were not born in 1979.

“The big difference now is that people yell it with a smile on their face as opposed to the hatred that once was,” Potvin told Fred Bierman of The Times in 2006. “It’s just one of those things that’s passed from one generation to the next, I guess. Kind of like season tickets.”


Nilsson says he feels no pain from the broken ankle, but he does have an artificial right hip, and his neck and spine still feel the worst hit he ever received, in junior hockey in Sweden in 1972. The Potvin hit is merely a chant.

“I thought it would die out, but it hasn’t,” Nilsson said. He notes that his No. 11 is retired in the rafters, after he lent it to a bloke named Messier in the 1990s. 

Fifteen years ago, a mutual friend invited Nilsson and Potvin to a clay-target shooting range in Westchester, where a lot of Rangers fans were present.

“The fans started shouting, ‘How can you put guns in the hands of Potvin and Nilsson?’ ” Ulf recalled, laughing.

That might have been the last time he saw Potvin. They haven’t run into each other lately
