The voice on the other end of the telephone said, “Do you want to interview the most beautiful female athlete you’ve ever seen?”

That got my attention. Joey Goldstein always had an angle, and if you didn’t like his first angle, he had a backup angle. 

In this case, I said yes to his first angle. This was back a couple of decades, when the Millrose Games was still a magic name in New York, and to help sell tickets, Joey would push interviews with international athletes coming to town. 

Joey Goldstein, who died Feb. 13, was one of the great New York characters. He was responsible for some of the most enjoyable stories a writer could write and a reader could read, although it was necessary to remember that Joey was usually doing publicity for some large corporation. He was a tub-thumper with a good feel for the human side of sport. As Arthur Miller wrote, attention must be paid. 

The athlete Joey was promoting was Tamara Bykova, a high jumper from the Soviet Union, who had very long legs and an interest in art and fashion, or so Joey said.

There was a catch, of course — a Soviet handler named Lyudmila — so I had to settle for a rather stilted interview in a hotel lobby.

But the next day, in a burst of early Gorbachev glasnost, Bykova rang me and said she would like to visit the Metropolitan Museum of Art. My wife and I accompanied her on a pleasant outing; once again, Joey had come through.

Another time, when we were living in Kentucky, Joey invited me to a breeding shed for trotters and pacers, in Lexington. He just happened to be in the neighborhood, he said. 

Then there was the time he convinced me that I wanted to cover the opening day of the trout season, on April Fool’s Day, in the Catskills. For this frigid expedition, Joey dispatched his assistant, a lanky Sancho Panza named David Herscher, who wore a perpetual look of worry, as well he might, in the midst of working 37 frantic years for Joey. The fish were not biting that day, but the columnist was: Herscher came up with some ridiculous story about a two-headed gefilte fish that had been caught in the river. 


In the 1950s, Joey almost single-handedly invented harness racing as a major international sport. He once took a gaggle of New York writers — emphatically not yours truly — on a junket to Paris for a big race. The writers sat around the hotel playing gin rummy in their underwear and ordering deli sandwiches from room service, but Joey got his bylines from the big race, and that was what mattered.

He also worked for Evel Knievel, once pushing the gimmick that Knievel was going to jump over a tankful of man-eating sharks. Unfortunately, Red Smith discovered that that breed of shark had not taken a nip out of a human for eons, which sort of ruined that frolic. 

Joey and Fred Lebow, birds of a feather, helped create an institution, the New York City Marathon. Before dawn on race day, the rugelach and the coffee were on Joey at the Carnegie Delicatessen, as he corralled his reporters into the bus to the starting line on Staten Island. 

The difference between Joey and the bloodless corporate types of today is that Joey loved his subject matter. His favorite sport was college basketball of the 1940s and ’50s. I have sat with him in DiMaggio’s Trattoria in Port Washington, N.Y., schmoozing with Joey and Ray Lumpp of N.Y.U. and Fuzzy Levane of St. John’s. 

Joey was something of a scholar, when necessary. When Stan Isaacs of Newsday was searching for the name of Paul Revere’s horse, Joey came up with a tip that it was — what a coincidence — a Narragansett pacer.

That same love of history made Joey invaluable to the people at ESPN, who employed him as “an adviser, a confidant, a researcher, a historian, a procurer of interview subjects,” in the words of Chris LaPlaca, the senior vice president for corporate communications. To their vast credit, they adopted Joey as surrogate uncle and invaluable resource. 


Joey was a devoted husband to the beautiful Helene, an artist and saint who did the vast majority of raising their three sons: Jared, Adam and Robert. 

The other great woman in his life was Parbatty Harrilal, known as Ellen, his loyal office manager, who came from Guyana in 1980 and ran Joey’s life, fielding his incessant phone calls at her family home, often at 6 in the morning. “He relied on me. He trusted me. I have to say I will miss him very much,” Ellen said. She and “young David Herscher,” as Joey called his aide with Dickensian flourish, delivered lovely talks at Joey’s funeral on Wednesday. 

After Helene died in 1999, Joey was pursued by ladies from Florida to Long Island, but my wife and I were very impressed with a charming signora from Italy whom Joey brought to our house. We advised him that she was worth changing his life around, but Joey seemed afraid he could not find a corned beef sandwich in Modena. 

Did I mention that back in 1968, Joey, in his role as unofficial consigliere to the sports department of The New York Times, suggested the editors hire me? In later years, Joey would never bring up my eternal debt to him more than once every three months
