 HAD just retrieved my scarf, gloves and furry hat and checked my husband had the tickets when the phones started ringing. TV and radio programme fixer-uppers were asking if I'd be available for interviews.
Those based south of Gretna gave the impression of being surprised I was heading out the door, high on life for the Hibs versus Celtic game at Easter Road.

The journalists wanted to speak to me about the Panorama programme and the consultation papADVERTISEMENTer on Physician Assisted Dying I launched on Monday. 

Whether they had expected someone tired with life's grind, or a poor old soul waiting for the grim reaper, I don't know, but I suspect they were surprised to find me if perhaps not completely hale, certainly exceedingly hearty. 

After Hibs' win, and that goal, I felt better than I'd done for weeks during which I've been excessively busy. 

Part of my work overload was due to all the thinking, writing and evaluating I'd been doing about dying, but dying is the end part of living, so why should we shy away from thinking about it as we do about other future aspects of life? 

Certainly, for me and lots of people I've met during this past year, even while living life to the max, it makes sense to look forward and plan for a time in our lives when that may not be possible. And, it's easier to do when life is good.

By accident, I found myself duty bound to attempt to clarify the law on assisted dying, and represent the views and needs of people who are ticking along, perhaps not having a whale of a time, but coping with MS, or Parkinson's and still enjoying their family, work and hobbies, but whose degenerative condition has the possible prognosis of what, for them, would constitute an intolerable curtailment of their personal and social functions. 

Some of the people I've met have already experienced a very significant reduction in their motor functions. For them my proposal for a change in the law has great urgency because at present, if they decide they wish to shorten their lives because of intolerable pain or other reason, they must leave their home and travel to Switzerland to die.

Some supporters of the hospice movement disagree that MS sufferers like Val McKay from Perth, who featured in the Panorama programme, have no other choice but the Dignitas Clinic in Zurich as they move into the terminal stages of their lives. They quote the love and palliative care experienced in hospices. 

I have a great admiration for the work done by the hospices, but doctors, nurses and patients' relatives have shared with me their regrets that for some patients palliative care doesn't provide the peaceful, pain-free end to life we all hope for.

Sufferers like Val or myself know we might be amongst the unlucky minority for whom palliative care is of no great assistance in retaining dignity or control over our lives. 

My proposed Bill would allow such people the choice of continuing with palliative care, or having made a request of a GP prior to the loss of function they find intolerable, the right to ask for assistance to die.

If experience elsewhere is any guide, many people never exercise the choice, but being able to legally do so provides peace of mind to them.

Some people opposed to my proposition cite practical reasons as to why it couldn't, or shouldn't, become law. I'm pretty certain that the choice boils down to whether or not, as individuals, we believe we should have autonomy over how we live our lives, including how they end. 

Some people believe such autonomy to be an impossible concept, because only God can decide when life ends. I respect such belief, and I don't wish to compromise it in any way, but, like Val McKay and many others, I do not share it. 

The consultation document I published will test my belief that a considerable body of opinion amongst Scots, between 70 and 80 per cent, support the idea of the person concerned deciding when life has become intolerable, and their right to ask a qualified doctor for help to end it. 

This issue should be understood and debated – even opponents with strong moral objections like Cardinal Keith O'Brien support that. Here's hoping at least eighteen MSPs agree, because producing a Bill that is then scrutinised by Parliamentary Committees is the only way to investigate the matter, and to clarify the law.
