WELL, who'd have thought it? Mild-mannered, serious suit Alistair Darling is one of life's gamblers. In spite of having a genuinely piratical look long before a make-up artist working on "Pirates of the Caribbean" attacked Johnny Depp with the full force of an eyeshadow palette, the Chancellor was known as a reasonable, "safe pair of hands" sort of politician.

As the Lothian Region Transport Convener in the extravagant 80s, there was no shooting for the stars with a tram system for Edinburgh, or resuscitating the plans for a motorway through the city to rival anything Glasgow's civic vandalism had achievedADVERTISEMENT. 

In Westminster, he's had a succession of important jobs and apart from the Big Broon himself, has been on the Labour front bench longer than anyone.

However, because he skipped all the classes at the Tony Blair PPP school (Personal Promotion Politics), he was virtually unknown outside Edinburgh. Few people had a bad word to say about him. His public reputation was much like that of ex-world champion snooker player Steve Davis. Nobody would have described him as an exciting risk-taker. 

Yet Monday's performance at the dispatch box, in spite of the Chancellor's super-cool, laid-back style, was nothing short of breathtaking. It was sheer audacity to announce, as though trumpeting a national triumph, that the only way for the UK to get out from under the burden of excessive debt incurred by unrestricted borrowing was for the country to take up borrowing where we, the people as individual consumers, had left off. 

Now I happen to think he had no choice but to copy Keynes, as I told readers a few weeks ago. But I never imagined he would do so with such panache, particularly when he had to play both good cop and bad cop. Wearing his white hat, he reduced VAT by 2.5 per cent, gave pensioners £60 and ordered a breathing space of three months before mortgage lenders could put payment defaulters out of their homes. 

But wearing his black hat, he had to warn that his generosity was limited, that tax increases for the highest earners would start in a couple of years and that National Insurance will also take more out of our pay packets.

He gambled on his audience outside the House of Commons taking his statement on how he would save the UK economy at face value. 

He risked public scorn for his strategy for achieving balanced books by 2015 – that's after two general elections. With a nice smile, he lightly dismissed John Redwood (who also looks more of a parliamentary pussycat than formerly) when the hardest Chancellor the Tories never had pointed out that his take from squeezing the ultra-rich till their pips squeak would only yield £2.5 billion tax income – not even enough to pay the interest on the hundreds of billions he'll borrow.

It's received wisdom that Budgets, and pre-Budget statements, are best eaten cold in the days following Chancellors' statements. And so it will be with Alistair's gamble. 

The Chancellor is on unfamiliar ground – he's having to hope that we will do as he has said we should, and spend, spend, spend. But what if enough people do what the Japanese did in a similar economic situation, and save, save, save? Will he have any choice other than to raise taxes paid by people not in the ultra-rich bracket if his borrowing reaches the point beyond which the stability of the pound is threatened? 

Heavy duty financial and economic questions, handled with apparent confidence by the Chancellor, that have in part been gestating during Labour's decade at the Treasury, but which, for the probationary period of his pre-Budget announcements, are not being laid at his door, will push their way up the political agenda.

My hunch would be that, despite the three-month stay of execution, the thousands of people made homeless following the loss of their jobs will precipitate another amending announcement from the Chancellor. 

The severe shortage of good quality, lower-rent housing will make economic recovery much more difficult to achieve – families in B&B accommodation have a hard enough job keeping body and soul together to find the energy, focus and determination for job- hunting.

So don't for a minute be taken in by the gamble. Hope that the Chancellor gets lucky, but be philosophical if he isn't, and concede it was worth a try. 

Saints alive!
MAYBE I've missed it, maybe the Scottish Government has a fantastic celebration all lined up for Sunday, St Andrew's Day. But if I haven't, and if the Culture Minister and the Education Minister have fallen down on this job, shouldn't they be considering their positions?

After all the brave talk of last year, about introducing ourselves to the world, is it any wonder that the Unionists think they've won the war?

