I HAD my first ever lunch in the House of Lords last week – and it was great. Unfortunately, the table talk wasn't as cheery as it might have been. I was in London to meet Lord Joffe to talk about dying – but the scallops were delicious.

Lord Joffe's House of Lords Bill would have given terminally ill people the legal right to seek assistance in bringing their life to an end shortly before nature would have done. He mustered 100 peers to vote for his Bill, but was defeated by 48 voteADVERTISEMENTs in favour of leaving the law in England and Wales as it is – very muzzy.

But the idea isn't dead: Baroness Margaret Jay, the daughter of former Prime Minister Jim Callaghan, is taking over the lead role in the Lords and plans to introduce another Bill, similar to Lord Joffe's. However, that might change. The English campaign might follow the path mapped out in the Members' Bill I hope to introduce into Holyrood at Easter next year.

Campaigners for choices at the end of life south of the Border may be able to take encouragement if there's public support for my approach, based on Dutch law. My proposals will be published, I hope, at the end of this month, so Margaret Jay will be able to judge from the results of our consultation if the public is better informed than is generally believed by politicians, fearful of losing votes, on the basic and more complicated decisions on end of life choices.

I don't deny the sensitivity or difficulty in some of the questions implicit in the idea of assisted dying, but the uncertainty in the legal position, north and south of the Border, has been thrust into the spotlight by the experiences of three very different people who have expressed their wish to exercise choice over how their lives end. 

Debbie Purdie suffers from a degenerative condition that can have an ending she knows she wishes to truncate before it becomes intolerable to her. She may need some form of assistance to do this. Her husband might help her by administering the drug that will cause her heart to slow down and then stop, or by assisting her to travel to Switzerland to die in a Dignitas facility.

But when she tried to clarify her husband's legal position, an English High Court judge said the law could only be clarified by Parliament. Scots law differs, but there's little doubt that Scottish judges would take a similar position. There have been no prosecutions of persons assisting suicide in Scotland but, as in England, there are people who'd like clarification of the law. Since there are more than 700 UK citizens registered with Dignitas, it seems reasonable to assume some are Scots.

Dan James was only 23 years old when he travelled to Switzerland to die, with assistance, we must assume, from his parents. Following a rugby accident he was quadriplegic, and convinced his parents that he found his life to be intolerable and so wished to end it. Mr and Mrs James are currently in limbo, unable simply to mourn the loss of their son until the Public Prosecutor in England decides how to dispose of the police findings on whether they have to be pursued under the law as stated by the High Court.

Lastly, 13-year-old Hannah Jones has chosen not to proceed with the heart transplant that doctors now see as the last possible treatment for her acute myeloid leukaemia. Although her decision, that will lead to her death, is one of omission rather than the commission of seeking assistance to die, the same issues of personal morality, rights and choice have to be resolved.

But at what age is a child capable of exercising these? Should the law I propose require another suitably qualified and registered person to concur with the patient's doctor if he or she is under 16, or 14, years? 

And, in the interests of equity, should the sole determining factor be the patient's expressed wish to end his or her life because it is intolerable? How is this to be regulated in the interests of people who make this choice, and also clinicians whose personal morality precludes assisting a patient to die?

Because of the number, and varied nature, of current cases of people wishing clarification of the law at the very least – and the growing numbers of people desperate enough to leave their home, family and friends in an attempt to die with dignity, either as the last act of palliative care or because their condition is not conducive to such care at the end of life – we can't ignore this issue.