SOMETIMES it's great to be proved correct, particularly when just about everybody else is of a different opinion. Other times it's sickening to have confirmation of having called it right – there's no joy in being proved right when the outcome is just about as bad as it could be.

Last week, I've no doubt my predictions of stalemate in the development of the powers of Holyrood should Labour win the Glenrothes by-election were dismissed as the ramblings of an old dingbat by my critics. They don't understand the role of an IndepADVERTISEMENTendent MSP. Fortunately, enough voters in Lothian do, so I'm in there trying my best to serve them, and advance the interests of all Scotland as I'm doing so.

Being true to my own observations and analysis, believing that any SNP government should persuade people in Scotland of the desirability and superiority of Scottish sovereignty so that we might as a national community develop and expand the quality of life in Scotland, I'm duty bound to say what nationalists inside the SNP daren't: Alex Salmond is performing well as First Minister, but this does not equate to a persuasive campaign for independence. Political independence is the only delivery mechanism for what the SNP is trying to do with hand-me-down devolution, but sovereignty won't be won by stealth.

I didn't expect the SNP to win Glenrothes and copped a few brickbats for saying so on Michael Crow's politics programme on STV. I was pretty sure proprietary pride in Gordon Brown's being a Fifer would rob the SNP of victory. Also, when responding to the "Who'll win Glenrothes?" question posed by 'Politics Now' presenter Michael Crow, the economic abyss was beginning to open up in front of us, so I expressed a belief that given this worrying situation voters would head for the port they knew in a storm.

But I thought the result would be close, until foreign banks started to crash and our two biggest followed suit. I decided the game was a bogey only after Labour in particular started bashing Alex Salmond with cheap jibes about Iceland, Ireland and Norway being basket cases, thereby proving beyond reasonable doubt that Scotland couldn't be independent without poverty and pestilence stalking the land (Yes, this was well before the IMF forecast Britain would experience the hardest depression in the EU . . . presumably because of the fantastic strength of the economy of which we are part).

But where was Alex Salmond when this worm started to nibble at Scotland's self-belief? He was in Glenrothes, shoulder-to-shoulder with, and over-shadowing, the candidate. The SNP leader now accepts the blame for not responding hard enough and quick enough to the council's new charges for household help for elderly people. Instead of defending the council's actions he should have been able to hark back to warnings to Scots that his, and councils' hands were tied by the restrictions of Westminster holding the purse strings.

His response should have been to explain why the Scottish Government was hamstrung by devolution, could only rob Peter to pay Paul, and point out the differences between Scotland and Iceland, Ireland and Norway. Instead of owning up to economic impotence, Alex and his team tried to sell the idea of Scotland's strength in the face of economic adversity. Voters didn't buy this, because they hadn't heard nearly enough about the facts, figures, strengths, possibilities, probabilities, choices, and pitfalls of deconstructing the UK and replacing the political union with a new arrangement based on equality and co-operation.

Unionist politicians, like the new Secretary of State Jim Murphy, made a great job of equating managerial mistakes and dodgy business judgement on the part of bankers with the certainty of Scotland going belly-up without the protection afforded by the strength of the UK economy. Alex Salmond is more than capable of taking on these spurious arguments – so why didn't he?

He'll win battles, but he'll always lose the war by neglecting the argument for sovereignty in favour of promising Scots they need not vote for it until he, and his chosen lieutenants, have proved themselves capable of governing. To inspire voters to stick with the SNP through thick and thin, they have to believe in the message, not the medium.

Voters will desert him until they believe they cannot be all they can be, without the full range of joined-up powers in Holyrood enjoyed by the small economies the IMF says are better equipped to weather the global economic storm. 

Glenrothes should be a reality check. Scots hedge their bets by voting SNP when they feel they could live with independence if the majority opted for it and telling opinion pollsters they'd prefer to stay in the UK.

The First Minister should seek out some humble pie, and campaign on fundamentals, as well as managing devolution.
