DOES it matter who wins the Glenrothes by-election, compared to the result of the American Presidential and Congressional elections? 
Citizens of countries in the Middle East, Far East or South America, it's fair to say, would probably think the American elections of more interest to them, but many Scots who've been around politics for a while might find it difficult to agree wholeADVERTISEMENTheartedly.

In global terms, whether political, diplomatic or economic, there's no contest. America rules, and will do for the foreseeable future, given that fast-changing technologies now drive social and economic change and have persuaded futurologists to speculate on the short term rather than the long run. But that doesn't mean we in Scotland, and the UK, have no interest at stake in the outcome of the little local contest in Fife.

It could be argued that the electors in Glenrothes are unlucky to have a by-election in the middle of a collapse in Scotland's banking sector at the onset of a recession. Everyone's attention has been on the big picture and although local issues are no doubt raised on the doorstep, once the election is over they'll hardly be referred to by press or politicians.

Yet the Glenrothes by-election could determine a great deal about the future of Scotland. In politics, there's more luck than logic and events that might seem quite unconnected with the outcome of a political situation, such as the present debate and divide on the constitutional question, can prove to be important. In retrospect, the fall from grace of a prominent person or a sporting triumph or tragedy – such as Scotland's exit from the World Cup in 1978 – are seen to have been influential, even decisive, in resolving political dilemmas for voters.

It may be that the result of the Glenrothes by-election will be determined by the diminished feeling of confidence engendered by the crisis in the stability of the banks and the spurious campaign being waged by unionists that uses this personal setback for thousands of Scots families as a political club to beat to death the idea of independence.

If Labour holds Glenrothes it will be interpreted as a triumph for Gordon Brown and support for Westminster sovereignty as opposed to Holyrood moving on to independence. If the SNP wins, the movement towards Scottish sovereignty will be seen to be back on track, although die-in-the-ditch unionists will become ever more strident in their warnings of apocalyptic poverty. 

But a Labour victory may be undermined by feelings of great anger towards Gordon Brown's government if coroners continue to find that young men and women died as a result of having inadequate supplies of armour and weapons to protect themselves against their opponents in the wars that are being fought in spite of the lack of public support. 

Also, whether Labour wins or not, it's quite likely that if thousands of job losses result from the takeover of HBoS by Lloyds TSB, Gordon Brown will reap no electoral reward, unless Labour succeeds in squashing the optimism and raised aspirations brought about by having a Scottish Parliament. Following the Glenrothes by-election, if Labour wins, negative campaigning will be judged as successful. So political discussion in Scotland of how our Scottish economy should work its way out of recession will be stultified by the dogfight between Labour and the SNP. Going into the next Westminster election, Gordon Brown's government will sing the same auld sang, reminding Scotland our interests are better protected by Westminster and that anything else is just a fairytale.

A Labour win in Glenrothes will stymie the hopes of those who want to see Holyrood enhance its powers, whether devolved or sovereign. So our home-grown by-election may not be as interesting as the race for the White House, but it's likely to prove pretty important for us.

Scrum on over
By now everyone who reads a newspaper knows that mild-mannered John Park MSP, playing for Holyrood in a charity football match against the Scottish Press, gave passionate footie reporter Chick Young a right sore ankle. Questions are now being asked about the sportsmanship of the politicians.

By coincidence, on the same day as the incident that has resulted in Scots footie fans starting a campaign to install John Park as First Minister, in my capacity as convener of the cross-party group on sport, I received a letter from the French Parliament asking if we'd like to play their Deputies at rugby.

Acting before news of the ferocity of our footie team might cross the Channel, I replied "oui", but just in case, I didn't tell John Park.

Cool head in a crisis
Readers have probably spotted that I'm appalled by Sarah Palin. 

But even I admired her chutzpah following the radio wind-up call from Quebec. Her "C'est la vie" was formidable. 
