RENTACOP Ltd. Some people were very upset when such a jibe was aimed at our police service. I was more uneasy than upset, because, Rebus fan that I am, I'm still an admirer of Lothian and Borders' finest. My hope was that the practice of contracting out officers to provide policing services for private companies and public sector bodies did not compromise the ethos of the service.

I've been impressed by the senior officers in Lothian and Borders I've met over the years. As an MSP for Lothians, I've been briefed by them on every angle of the service's operational procedures, successes and, yes, failures too, although to be absoADVERTISEMENTlutely fair, there weren't too many such admissions. But I don't remember ever discussing with them the rising volume of paid work being undertaken by police officers for organisations from TV companies to a dance music show to shopping centre patrols.

As far as the second of these is concerned, I can't work out why a company such as "Rock Steady" isn't thought to have the adequate experience and professionalism to organise the security arrangements for a theatrical event. Also, why should police be paid extra to patrol a shopping centre? Isn't that what the current clamour for more police on the beat is all about – seeing uniformed police in the streets and other public gathering places? 

But the most intriguing contract struck with a private company has to be the one made with the producers of the Da Vinci Code to provide police protection for the scenes shot in Rosslyn Chapel. What public interest were the police protecting with their resources, prestige and expertise? At the time contracts like these were struck, there was an admitted shortage of officers. So how did the Chief Constable manage to resource private events etc without leaving a dangerously shallow reserve pool of officers who could be called in when off work to deal with emergency situations? Was anything of the £5 million paid to Lothian and Borders used to eke out too tight a budget?

Tom Halpin, Deputy Chief Constable of Lothian and Borders, said customised or exclusive policing duties would not create a two-class police service. Once again, knowing the calibre of Lothian and Borders' senior officers, I believe they would not acquiesce to such a development in policing. Provided the money isn't part of the "core funding" of Lothian and Borders, the argument goes, it doesn't undermine operational choices made by senior officers. If the service were awash with spare cash thanks to government largesse, I might buy that. But it's not, so the suspicion is that public money, which could be allocated to police to fulfil their remit, in one guise or another is being used by government or local government and their agencies to purchase personalised policing services that taxpayers and council taxpayers have already paid for. 

When trying to reconcile the different expectations of how a modern police service works with partner agencies to avoid social disorder and prevent crime, I considered if the payment made by Hibs and Hearts for policing football matches created a precedent for the city council paying for similar duties at other events that attract crowds. But in the interests of keeping public order, the police would be required anyway, so even without payment they'd be there – horses, vans, the lot. In recognition of the extra depth of service provided, the Capital's two teams make a donation to the cost . . . neither could afford to meet the full bill.

But, try as I might, I cannot equate keeping public order, and being partly paid for doing so by football clubs, with a visual presence in the High Street during the Fringe or just being there for Edinburgh's Great Winter Run.

I would expect the former to be part of the normal work of the police during the Festival, but unless police officers are needed to direct traffic flows during the latter, I wouldn't be too upset if I didn't see them there at all.

Scottish police forces now have guidance on when it's appropriate for officers to be hired out . . . but although the cliché says our police are wonderful (or pretty good), do we want them to be entrepreneurial? 

Criminal negligence
Gem and Bobby Wright got to me this week. Their interview on TV, in which they talked about the loss of their only son, Mark, in Afghanistan, was heartbreaking, and all the more so because of their quiet, controlled anger at how he died – trapped in a minefield, waiting to be rescued by helicopters that never came. 

The coroner who conducted the inquest into his death flayed the Ministry of Defence for the pathetically inadequate resources. Mistakes happen in wars, but this smacked of criminal negligence.

