WE seem to have been in the blocks for an eternity, but, thank goodness, now we're off and running. This afternoon, Sports Minister Stewart Maxwell announces the structure, and name, of the organisation that'll support, develop and encourage community involvement in sport.

I'll be very disappointed if it's called anything other than sportscotland, but my disappointment would pale into insignificance if Stewart Maxwell sticks to the SNP's manifesto commitment to red-card an organisation that's proved itself a winner over the past three years, after having lost the plot under its previous management.

A number of years ago, I attended sportscotland's AGM. There was a gap as wide as Hampden Park between the people who actually participate in, and run, sports clubs and the managers and policy-makers of sportscotland. 

The experience confirmed my fears about sportscotland's then aloofness from neighbourhood sport, but all that's changed under Stuart Harris's leadership. Something similar has happened to the "commercial" companies set up by local councils, and leisure and recreation passed has from their control to arms-length companies.

At the start of Edinburgh Leisure's tenure, I was unimpressed by the company's priorities. It seemed as though the management of community sporting activities came way behind acting like any other small company in seeking to maximise profit. Of course, Edinburgh Leisure was right to look around at the sports facilities and coaching offered by the private clubs like John Lloyd's. And, yes, the boss's idea of the financial savings to facilities users, through the Leisure Card system, is sound.

But in line with New Labour diktat, when local quangos, or arms-length companies relieved councillors of unambiguous accountability for leisure and recreation services, the new contracts offered to people who'd worked all, or most, of their lives in facilities like the Commie Pool, for example, had poorer conditions and starting salaries than those negotiated with their former council employers.

It took some of these local quangos a few years to find their feet, and maybe some aren't quite there yet. But to give honour where it's due, Edinburgh Leisure, like sportscotland, has improved the range of activities on offer across the city. But the organisation hasn't managed to shake free from the council, financially, and levels of new investment, in line with other cash shortages in the council's piggy bank, have left Edinburgh Leisure with loads of unfulfilled potential.

Yet it's one of the main conduits for the public health strategy, common to all parties in all the UK's legislatures, and stressed by the Prime Minister to illustrate his idea of the citizen's "responsibilities" for taking exercise and staying fit, leading to "entitlements" to medical care. But with the best will in the world, are people going to be persuaded to run, jump and roll about in Edinburgh Leisure pitches that double as dog exercise areas, and congregating areas for young drunks?

Thankfully, the PM seems to have de-coupled his thoughts on linking healthy lifestyle choices with NHS care "earned" rather than delivered when needed, now all he has to do to encourage fitness, not fatness, all round is to ensure that there's enough money in local councils and quangos to provide facilities and coaching in neighbourhood venues.

Also, he'll have to assure councils with PPP contracts for new schools that they won't be left high and dry financially if they either renegotiate access to sports and exercise facilities for the community, or, if they build on physical activities facilities to the original PPP. 

Quite possibly also, he'll have to devise carrot and stick taxation for high sugar and high fat content foods. Maybe the technology is already available to scan food for fat and sugar percentages when delivered to retailers, and to share the responsibility between supplier and consumer, of choosing healthy food, when purchased at checkouts. Taxes collected locally, are likely to encourage people to be more aware of shopping choices.

A few years ago, I doubt If I'd have written that. But just like the Health Minister in relation to sportscotland (I hope), I've changed my mind on just how much official effort it'll take to make us good sports and much healthier. All we need now is for Gordon Brown to change his mind on Holyrood getting taxation powers . . . because nationally, we can't fight the flab without them.


More court jester than court of justice

KENNY RICHEY might be home with his mother and her partner by the time you read this. Earlier this week, when we discussed the circus in Ohio and some aspects of his return to Edinburgh, her first concern was to get him to a GP. If he's guided by his mum, he'll manage what's bound to be a challenging, stressful re-entry into normal life.

Even though I'd discussed with his lawyers what his "No Contest" plea would amount to, I was still stunned to hear the judge solemnly stress that although it was not a "guilty" plea, the court would act as though it was and would therefore appropriately sentence him to 21 years for breaking into a greenhouse and removing flowers that he left at a neighbour's door; promising to baby-sit but not keeping this promise, therefore unintentionally attempting to bring about the child's death.

Pure legal gobbledegook, designed to save face for the state of Ohio's legal system and protect its guilty prosecutors. If you visit Ohio, don't risk dropping your sweetie-paper on the sidewalk.
