No one can dispute that American children are fatter than ever. Much of the blame has been placed on schools — lunch programs high in calories, snack and soda machines in the schools and curtailed or absent physical activities during the school day.

Although schools are hardly off the hook, a study published in April in The American Journal of Public Health, which tracked the physical condition of 5,000 children as they passed through kindergarten and first grade, found that the biggest gains in body mass index occurred in the summer when parents had sole responsibility for their children’s diets and exercise opportunities. 

Summer is also an opportunity, an ideal time to start children on a wholesome nutritional track and to encourage enjoyable physical activities, some of which can be pursued even after school resumes next fall.

Promoting Produce

A simple and beautifully illustrated new book by Steve Charney and David Goldbeck, “The ABCs of Fruits and Vegetables and Beyond,” is one good way to interest youngsters in these most nutritious foods, which are readily available, and tastier, in the summer. Part 1 is a series of easy-reader alphabet poems about common and uncommon produce, from apples to zucchini and including (wild) xemenia for the “X” page.

Part 2 offers a host of enticing food facts, recipes and fun. A simple summer dinner might be zucchini with linguini, a recipe that includes scallions, sweet red pepper, tomatoes, fresh basil and parsley, and, of course, zucchini. Or you could bake Z’s Mystery Cake, with whole-wheat flour, low-fat yogurt, chocolate chips and shredded zucchini.

The goal is to familiarize children with foods that are good for them. In many cases, children can help with the preparation, which often encourages them to taste, if not fully consume, something new and different. With yard space, you might even try growing some of these foods. A friend who has done just that with the help of her very young daughters had no trouble getting them to eat all kinds of vegetables, even before they were cooked.

Another recently published aid for those parents who have had a hard time introducing their children to wholesome foods is “The Sneaky Chef: Simple Strategies for Hiding Healthy Foods in Kids’ Favorite Meals” by Missy Chase Lapine. The book includes simple make-ahead purées or clever replacements that can greatly improve the way children eat — not to mention the rest of the family.

Of course, unlike the ABC book, “The Sneaky Chef” does not introduce children to the wonderful foods that can help them grow up healthy and strong. But it is a way to get them to eat many of these foods, through recipes like spaghetti and meatballs with eight hidden vegetables, cauliflower masked in mac and cheese, and blueberries hidden in cupcakes.

I confess to using this technique with my own children decades ago. I made muffins and quick breads with puréed and shredded fruits and vegetables. I puréed vegetables in soup broth and left visible only the vegetables I knew they would eat. I shredded vegetables into meatloaf and pasta sauces, and I made blender drinks with a variety of fruits.

Feeding for a Healthy Weight

There are three factors to consider when trying to encourage children to eat enough of the good foods and not too much of those snacks and treats that tend to pile on the pounds without providing much in the way of nutrition.

Factor 1: Don’t make an issue of it. Children who are repeatedly told that they cannot eat this or that tend to want those foods in preference to others. A child in my neighborhood whose parents forbid him to eat candy secretly stockpiled it in a friend’s house and ate it there. It would have been better to give him a “candy allowance,” say a piece of chocolate once a day or a candy bar once a week. Now that we know that dark chocolate may actually be healthful, there is even a good choice.

Ice cream, too, can be a reasonable treat, especially in the hot summer. But select the reduced-fat brands or frozen yogurt. Check the label for calories per serving — it should not exceed 150 — and keep in mind that a serving is half a cup.

Frozen-fruit ices, which have no fat, are another good choice in hot weather. I worry far less about the sugar content than the amount of fat in a frozen dessert. Or consider making your own fruit ices with your child’s help. It’s easy, and you can buy popsicle molds and sticks to help matters along.

