I am writing this column as much for me as for you. As the chill and darkness of winter descend, many of us turn to food for warmth and comfort. And the foods we favor in winter tend to be more calorically dense than the lighter foods we choose during the warmer months.


In addition, some of us, deterred by inclement weather, cut back on physical activities and burn fewer calories than when balmier days invite us to spend time outdoors.

And then there’s the coming holiday season, replete with the stress of too much to do, high-calorie temptations at every turn and, it seems, not enough time to expend those extra calories.

The inevitable result for many of us? A few extra pounds that we must struggle to lose when the weather warms up and the days get longer next spring. Unfortunately, though, too often those pounds remain, only to increase further the next winter, and the next, until they undermine our health as well as our psyche.

But none of this needs to happen. By adopting a sensible eating strategy and factoring exercise into your daily routine, you can indulge in some holiday treats and survive the dark, cold months without gaining weight.

It’s possible that we are biologically programmed to put on extra padding when the weather gets cold. Fat, after all, provides insulation. But even if the fat-as-insulation theory is true, must we all succumb to the dictates of nature? We do, after all, have lots of garments to keep us warm, including moderately-priced fleece, down-filled jackets and coats, and boots lined with fake fur. 

Also favoring overconsumption in cold weather is the fact that eating generates heat. Food, as it is consumed, digested and metabolized, warms you up. Haven’t you often found yourself shedding a layer in the middle of a big meal? Certainly I have, and I’ve noticed others doing the same. 

But here again, there are better choices, like hot soups and low-calorie drinks, that can warm body and soul without piling on pounds.

And don’t forget that exercise generates heat. Going for a brisk 30-minute walk instead of dipping into the cookie jar or raiding the chocolate will not only warm you up but also help counter the winter blues that, however mild, prompt many to overeat. 

A Mediterranean Approach 

Dr. Michael D. Ozner, a cardiologist and diet maven, reminds us that we have choices, and we can choose foods and exercise habits that enable us to reduce the risk of cancer, heart disease and diabetes and that keep off those unwanted pounds, even during times of maximum temptation. Dr. Ozner wrote a cookbook, “The Miami Mediterranean Diet,” to prove it. The book is filled with delicious-sounding recipes based on fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts and seafood.

He points out that in the traditional Mediterranean diet, which international studies have linked to the lowest risk of chronic disease, “meat is at the tip of the pyramid.” 

“We consume too much red meat,” Dr. Ozner said in an interview. “It contains saturated fat and omega-6 fatty acids but no omega-3s, which protect against disease. The result is an increase in cancer risk, heart attacks and strokes. We should be eating red meat as an exception, not an everyday food.”

Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids include cold-water fish like salmon, tuna, sardines and trout, and walnuts and almonds. Try walnuts in your oatmeal and salad.

Avoiding Processed Foods

The traditional Mediterranean diet contains few if any processed foods, many of which are loaded with unhealthy saturated and trans fats and high-fructose corn syrup. And just because a processed food proclaims “no trans fats” on the label does not mean it’s good for you. It may still be too high in fat, sugar, salt or calories, so check the nutrition label before you buy. 

As for beverages, Dr. Ozner’s vote goes first to water, which helps fill you up and reduces the likelihood of overeating. Try drinking a glass of water before meals and another with meals. A five-ounce glass of wine with dinner is permissible, even desirable, as long as you are not addicted to alcohol (those who are can substitute purple grape juice). In the Mediterranean, alcohol — mostly red wine — is consumed with meals. 

But Dr. Ozner warns against fruit drinks and sodas, which simply supply sweet liquid calories that could be harmful to health. He also suggests adding unsweetened whey protein powder to breakfast shakes, cooked cereals, soups and the like, for an appetite-satisfying protein boost.For desserts, he leans heavily on fruits and nuts and dishes made with them, like plum compote sweetened with Splenda granules, apples baked with banana liqueur, and dates stuffed with almonds and almond paste. He gives his O.K. to dark chocolate with a high percentage of cocoa flavonols, which are good for blood vessels, but he cautions against going overboard, since all chocolate is a concentrated source of calories.

Rule No. 1: Don’t go to a party or dinner hungry. And don’t skip a meal beforehand. Dr. Ozner recommends eating a sensible snack — a handful of almonds or an apple — and drinking a glass of water before a holiday party or meal.

If Thanksgiving is not Thanksgiving without pumpkin pie, consider making your own with evaporated skim milk instead of heavy cream. And rather than a commercial crust, make one using a spread or shortening that is free of trans fats. 

Or you might substitute a traditional New England dessert like Indian pudding, as suggested by Nikki and David Goldbeck, authors of “American Wholefoods Cuisine,” often referred to as the vegetarian “Joy of Cooking.” Their turkey-free Thanksgiving feast also includes pumpkin soup (milk but no cream), chickpea “birds” with tahini gravy and homemade cranberry sauce, candied sweet potatoes and cauliflower topped by a puffed omelet.

Whatever the menu, the secret to caloric sanity is portion control. Too much of any food, even ones that are good for you, is not good. Avoid throwing caution to the wind just because it’s the holidays. It’s not as if you’ll never have those foods again. 

Keep Track, Lose Weight

One study of people participating in a behavioral program to combat obesity found that those who kept track of everything they ate during 10 weeks that included Thanksgiving and New Year’s feasts continued to lose weight. Those who failed to monitor their food intake gained.

Dr. Ozner notes that the stress of holiday activities can prompt people to binge or to simply eat more than they normally would. He suggests taking the time to sit down and enjoy a meal and perhaps to take a short nap afterward.

Finally, the doctor warns: “Don’t neglect exercise when things get hectic. Exercise is even more important around holiday time.” In addition to being a great stress reducer, physical activity can help curb your appetite while it uses excess calories. Especially helpful is exercise the morning after a big dinner.

