Two Minnesota friends — Margaret, 79, and Davis, 84 — are a hearty pair who take an exercise walk for an hour each day. Then they return home to a kitchen that is an accident waiting to happen. On the floor are loose runners — beautiful rugs, to be sure, but a fall hazard for people of any age and especially risky for those over 65.

They did place slip-resistant mats under the rugs, which helped some. But the rugs still move around and can easily cause someone to trip. And when someone their age trips and falls, chances are something will break.

Falls are now the leading cause of injury-related deaths among people 65 and older, the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta recently reported. The fatality rate from falls rose by more than 55 percent from 1993 to 2003, the latest year for which statistics are available. In fact, death rates from falls have risen faster than injury rates from falls, in part because people are now living to ages when frailty raises the risk that a fall will be fatal.

But neither falls nor serious injury from them is an inevitable consequence of advanced age. Brian M. Franklin, a certified athletic trainer at University Orthopedics in Atlanta, and the MetLife Foundation, in collaboration with the Atlanta centers, offer excellent suggestions for tuning up your body and your environment to prevent falls, as well as injuries from the falls that do happen.

Bodily Defenses

Knowing the underlying causes of falls suffered by older people will help you appreciate the steps experts recommend to prevent them. Heading the list of causes for otherwise healthy people is loss of muscle strength followed by diminished flexibility, which together result in instability and a decreased ability to catch yourself should you start to fall, Mr. Franklin said at a recent meeting sponsored by the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons and the National Athletic Trainers’ Association.

Then there are medical factors, of which osteoarthritis — the wear-and-tear kind — is most prominent. Arthritis can make joints stiff and painful, resulting in a loss of flexibility and mobility. Some medications taken by older people can cause dizziness or sleepiness and impair balance. People who have suffered a stroke or other neurological disorder may be unable to move normally. 

Other predisposing factors common among older people include cardiovascular disease and accumulated injuries that weaken the musculoskeletal system. Diminished vision caused perhaps by cataracts, glaucoma, macular degeneration or lack of proper glasses is also a factor in falls among the elderly. 

And when older people fall, their weakened bones are more likely to break. As many as one woman in four and one man in 15 over the age of 50 can expect to suffer a fracture during their remaining years.

So, the first step is to build muscle strength in the thighs and trunk to increase stability. Try this simple exercise: Lie on your back on the floor and raise one leg at a time a foot off the floor, holding it there for 10 seconds. Gradually build up to 10 repetitions with each leg and you’ll see how much stronger your thigh muscles can get.

Likewise, there are easy exercises to improve balance: Gently holding the back of a sturdy chair, raise one foot off the floor, then try to let go of the chair. Once that is mastered, try it with your eyes closed, then try it standing on your toes. Tai chi is also an excellent activity proven to improve balance and reduce falls.

Daily stretches, especially of the legs and hips, can slow the loss of flexibility that can result in a fall.

People over 50 — and especially those over 65 — should have annual eye exams by an ophthalmologist and not postpone getting new glasses or undergoing cataract surgery. Corneal implants inserted when cataracts are removed can improve visual acuity better than your current glasses.

If you take medications, ask your pharmacist whether any of them, alone or in combination, may cause dizziness or sleepiness. If so, ask your doctor if a reduced dosage or another medication would be just as effective and safer. 

Don’t forget “dem bones,” which need to be strong if they are to remain intact should you fall. In addition to consuming adequate amounts of calcium and vitamin D, you need to do weight-bearing exercise. Bone-benefiting exercises include walking, step and water aerobics, dancing, yoga, tai chi, hiking and resistance training. Cycling and swimming, while excellent activities especially for people with arthritis, are not as effective as walking for strengthening bones, Mr. Franklin said.

