Although I wrote about children and gun safety just two years ago, the continuing tragedies involving guns in private homes compel me to repeat my plea that all guns be stored safely in a way that keeps children away from them.

In May, the 10-year-old son of a New York City police officer died after accidentally shooting himself in the head with his father’s .38-caliber pistol, which he found at home in a closet while looking for a ball. 

In June, a 12-year-old New Jersey boy was accidentally killed by his fifth-grade friend while the two were playing with his father’s gun, which the children found in an unlocked box.

These are just two of several hundred such deaths that will almost certainly occur this year. Guns account for 10 percent of all injury-related deaths among children ages 5 to 14.

For every child who dies from a gunshot wound, three others are injured, and a quarter of those injuries bring on permanent disabilities. 

A Familiar Role for Firearms

Most young children are all too familiar with guns, having seen them on television, in the movies or in video games. As a result, some children may not realize that when a real person is shot, he may never get up again.

The most frequent perpetrator in childhood gunshot fatalities and injuries is another child, who may have assumed the gun wasn’t loaded or wasn’t real. Many children (as well as a good number of adults) can’t tell the difference between a real gun and a fake one. 

The most frequent sites of childhood encounters with guns are their own homes or the homes of friends or relatives. Children, naturally curious, love to poke around in “secret” places, places where their parents may have hidden a gun, thinking a child would never find it there.

A review of firearm ownership and storage practices in American households, published two years ago in The American Journal of Preventive Medicine, revealed that “firearms are as likely to be present in U.S. homes with children as in homes without children, and they are often stored in unlocked locations and/or loaded.”

This finding prompted two public health specialists, Dr. Frances Baxley of San Francisco General Hospital and Dr. Matthew Miller of the Harvard School of Public Health, to examine what parents know about their children’s access to guns in the home.

In the May issue of The Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, the researchers reported that children knew a lot more about the location of guns in the home and were far more likely to have handled those guns than their parents thought. They studied 314 parent-child pairs who lived in homes that had guns, interviewing the parents separately from their children. 

Over all, they found that “39 percent of parents who reported that their children were unaware of the storage location of the guns were contradicted by their children’s reports.” And of the children who said they had handled firearms in the home, only 60 percent were described by their parent as having done so. 

Even in homes where all the guns were locked away, the children were as likely to report having handled a gun in the home as were children in homes where guns were stored unlocked.

Clearly, parents are far too often unaware of how much their children know about the location of guns and what they do with guns kept locked or unlocked in their homes.

“This finding,” the authors wrote, “suggests that common preventive measures for ensuring children’s safety around household guns often fail to prevent children from gaining unacknowledged access to household guns and may, in fact, lead parents to have misplaced confidence in their ability to accurately predict their children’s broader experience with guns in the home.” 

A further complication is the frequent failure of parents to assure that guns in the homes their children visit are inaccessible to children.

A study led by Dr. Tamera Coyne-Beasley of the University of North Carolina found that one-third of gun owners in the United States with children under age 6 kept a firearm unlocked at home, and guns were kept unlocked in 56 percent of homes where children visited. 

The Second-Best Solution

If it were up to me, there would be no guns in any household with children under 18. Better yet, no guns in any household — children or no children. But with half of American homes now in possession of at least one gun, I know this is unlikely to happen. So the second-best measure is to make sure that guns are kept in a place and in a way that children can’t get to them.

These are the basic rules of gun safety:

Store all guns unloaded.

Keep your guns locked in a gun safe or a strongbox and carry the key with you or keep it where a child can’t get it.

Store all guns separate from their ammunition and keep the ammunition locked as well.

Store your guns out of the sight and the reach of children.

Any gun that cannot be locked away should be stored unloaded with a trigger lock in place at all times.

Make sure you are trained in the proper care, handling and use of any weapon you own.

Check with relatives and the parents of friends your child visits to be sure they practice these gun safety rules.

If your children are old enough and have your permission to handle a gun, make sure they receive safety training from a qualified instructor and use the gun only under adult supervision.

The events surrounding the headline “Boy, 6, Kills Mom During Target Practice” from March 2001 should never have occurred. 

The family went target shooting, and the boy was allowed to handle his father’s gun. The father stepped away for a moment, and when his son tried to reload the gun, he accidentally shot his mother in the head.

Even if you have no guns at home and would never dream of using one, your children should be taught about guns. First, they must understand that guns are not toys, that violence on television or in the movies is not real, and that guns in real life can cause injury or death.

Second, they must be told never to touch a gun or bullets and to assume that any gun is loaded and can be fired. If they find a gun anywhere or encounter someone handling a gun, they must leave the area at once, go to a safe place and tell an adult what they saw as soon as possible. 

