Every year in the United States, six million women become pregnant, and half of these pregnancies are unplanned. More than three-fourths of teenage pregnancies and half of the pregnancies among women approaching menopause are unexpected.


A shocking 60 percent of unplanned pregnancies occur in women using contraception, and nearly half of unplanned pregnancies end with an elective abortion. This should not be happening in a country with such a wide variety of contraceptive options. The safest and fastest way to reduce abortions and unwanted births is to assure that every sexually active woman is always protected by a contraceptive that suits her needs and health circumstances, unless and until she chooses to become pregnant.

Condoms, diaphragms, sponges, cervical caps, and spermicidal jellies and creams, which must be applied at times of sexual activity, often fail because couples are unprepared or unwilling to interrupt a moment of passion. But a broad range of hormonal contraceptives and intrauterine devices are highly effective in preventing pregnancy.

In the July issue of Mayo Clinic Proceedings, a team of physicians from the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine in Scottsdale, Ariz., described the evolution of hormonal contraception, starting in 1960 with the approval of the first birth control pill by the Food and Drug Administration. 

These early high-dose pills were soon linked to a high incidence of serious health problems, including blood clots and strokes, leading to a gradual and eventually drastic reduction in the hormone levels used for contraception.

Reduction in Doses

Today, instead of the 150 micrograms of estrogen in the original oral contraceptive, there are just 30 to 35 micrograms in most pills, and two newer ones with just 25 micrograms of the estrogen ethinyl estradiol, which is used in all estrogen-containing contraceptives. There has also been a drastic reduction in doses of the progestins — synthetic progesterone — in oral contraceptives. Using more potent and selective progestins allows for lower estrogen doses without disrupting a woman’s menstrual cycle. For example, the Mayo team noted, norgestimate, the progestin found in Ortho Cyclen and Ortho Tri-Cyclen, suppresses ovulation at doses lower than natural progesterone. It has almost no masculinizing effects and does not reduce the beneficial effects of estrogen on blood lipids (higher HDL’s and lower LDL’s). 

For women who prefer less frequent menstruation, there are oral contraceptives taken continuously for 6 to 12 weeks — followed by a week of no pills — which are associated with fewer menstrual-related complaints.

Still, there are many women who have trouble remembering to take a pill every day, who may not want others to know about their use of contraception or whose sexual activity is too unpredictable to warrant a daily routine. In those cases, hormonal contraception can be delivered by other means, including injections, transdermal (through the skin) patches, vaginal rings, implantable devices and intrauterine devices.

The injectables, including Depo-Provera, a new progesterone-only contraceptive, have been associated with a number of undesirable effects, including altered menstrual bleeding, bone loss, mood disorders (these should not be used by women with a history of depression) and a significant delay in the return of fertility once the injections are stopped. A year after stopping the injections, 80 percent of women are ovulating again and can become pregnant.

Warning About the Patch

The contraceptive patch delivers continuous daily doses of a progestin and 20 micrograms of estrogen. It is applied weekly for three weeks, followed by a patch-free week during which menstruation occurs. The F.D.A. has warned, however, that patch users are exposed to higher levels of estrogen than are most pill takers, since the hormone passes directly through the skin into the blood stream. The patch is most effective in preventing pregnancy in women who weigh less than 200 pounds. It has not been linked to weight gain or adverse effects on blood lipids. 

The vaginal ring, approved in 2001, releases daily doses of a progestin and 15 micrograms of estrogen. It can be inserted easily by the woman. It remains in place for three weeks, then is removed, and a new ring is inserted seven days later, after menstruation.

An implanted device, which is expected to be available in the United States soon, releases only a progestin that prevents pregnancy by inhibiting ovulation and changing the consistency of the cervical mucus. It remains effective for three years, but only two years in obese women. Frequent or prolonged irregular bleeding is its main side effect. It must be medically implanted under the skin and removed medically as well. Normal cycles usually resume within three months after removal. 

A hormone-releasing IUD, sold under the trade name Mirena, was approved by the F.D.A. in 2000 and remains the only such product available. It releases 20 micrograms of the progestinlevonorgestrel (LNG) each day at first, declining to 10 micrograms by five years, after which time it must be replaced. Both the insertion and the removal are done by a physician.

A Highly Effective Method

It is 99.7 percent effective in preventing pregnancy — about as effective as female sterilization but completely reversible, studies have shown — and it has the benefits of suppressing growth of the uterine lining and decreasing menstrual flow. Thus, it is especially useful for women with heavy periods and those who are approaching menopause, the Mayo team said. After a year of use, at least one woman in five with this type of IUD stops having periods altogether.

During the first three months of use, LNG IUD’s can cause breakthrough bleeding and spotting, which lessens with continued use. The main complaints about LNG IUD’s include higher rates of acne, dizziness, headaches, breast tenderness and weight gain, similar to the side effects of all other hormonal contraceptives, according to a report published in April 2005 in the journal Population Reports by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

As effective and safe as IUD’s are, they have never caught on with American women. Today, half a century after the first IUD became available, fewer than 1 percent of American women of childbearing age use one. A major setback in wider adoption of IUD’s stemmed from the high risk of infection that was associated years ago with the Dalkon Shield, an IUD with a flawed design that is no longer marketed. Current IUD’s are designed differently from the Dalkon Shield.

Women seeking a hormone-free method might consider one of the newer copper-containing IUD’s on the market, like the ParaGard Copper T 380A, used by 75 million women worldwide, according to its manufacturer, FEI Women’s Health L.L.C.. Studies have shown it to be more than 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy. Copper IUD’s with more than 250 millimeters of copper are as effective as the LNG IUD, but those with lower amounts of copper are less effective.

