The summer was hardly under way when the first rash of drownings in the New York area forever changed the lives of the victims’ families. These terrible accidents should never have happened:

• A 2-year-old toddled out of the house while her mother was on the phone, climbed the ladder into the family’s aboveground pool and drowned.

• An 18-year-old who could not swim was standing in waist-deep water on a guarded Atlantic beach when he was apparently swept off his feet by the undertow and never seen again.

• A 20-year-old nonswimmer, described as being afraid of the water, was out with friends who had been drinking. He climbed an eight-foot fence to get into a closed pool and died.

Every summer in the United States, many hundreds of children, teenagers and young adults drown in pools or natural bodies of water. The cases described above are typical: parents turn their backs for a few minutes, and a small child falls into the family pool; a nonswimmer enters hazardous water without a proper flotation device; an inebriated teenager or young adult acts foolishly, perhaps on a dare from friends.

Drowning is the a leading cause of accidental death among children ages 1 to 14 in this country.

Furthermore, among preschoolers who drowned, 70 percent were being cared for by one or both parents at the time, and three-fourths of those children were out of sight for just five minutes or less.

Despite well-publicized strategies to prevent drowning deaths in children, drowning kills more than 1,400 children under 20 in a typical year. And for every child who dies in the water, four others are hospitalized for near-drowning, some of whom suffer permanent brain damage or physical disabilities.

Children ages 1 to 4 are most likely to drown in swimming pools, whereas older children and adolescents are most likely to drown in natural freshwater, according to a 1995 report in the journal Pediatrics. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that “most young children who drowned in pools were last seen in the home” less than five minutes before they died.

Two-thirds of all drownings happen from May to September, 40 percent of them on Saturday or Sunday.

Boys are at far greater risk of drowning than girls are, probably because boys take more risks. Black children ages 5 to 19 drown at more than twice the rate of white children, possibly because they are more likely to swim in natural bodies of water or unguarded public pools (in hotels and motels, for example) than in private residential pools.

Hotel and motel pools are a particular hazard for teenage boys because most have no lifeguard on duty, and youngsters who may be unable to swim may feel “obliged” to jump in with their friends.

“All drowning deaths are potentially preventable,” a team of federally financed researchers said recently in The American Journal of Public Health. They added that pool drownings were especially preventable because pools lacked the hazards associated with natural bodies of water, like currents, riptides and poor visibility.

So why do so many young people drown in pools, and what can be done to prevent these unfortunate events?

Three summers ago, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued a policy statement on the prevention of drowning. Because most children drown in pools at their own homes or at the homes of friends or relatives, the academy recommends the installation of a four-sided fence to isolate the pool from the house and yard.

The Consumer Product Safety Commission has published a detailed description of the fences and how to construct them to minimize unsupervised access to family pools (www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/pool.pdf). The idea is to have a fence at least four feet high that a small child cannot climb. The only access to the pool should be through a gate that opens away from the pool and shuts with a self-closing latch on the pool side that is installed three or more inches below the top of the fence.

A rigid pool cover can provide added protection, but by itself it is not enough. Children have drowned under them.

If the house forms the barrier on one side of the pool, all doors that could provide access to the pool should be equipped with alarms that can be disengaged only by an adult and only when the pool is in use.

Equally important is close supervision by an adult (not an older child) who knows how to swim and perform CPR. 

“When infants and toddlers are in or around water, a supervising adult should be within an arm’s length,” the pediatrics academy said. “The attention of the adult should be focused on the child, and the adult should not be engaged in other distracting activities.”

At the pool, you should have a telephone, a life preserver and a long-handled rescue hook. If you are holding a party where children will be using the pool, do not assume that visiting parents will provide supervision. Hire a professional lifeguard. Never rely on inflatable swimming aids (water wings, tubes) to keep nonswimmers and young children afloat.

Children should be taught to swim as soon as they are developmentally ready — usually by age 5. Children under 4 are rarely ready for swimming lessons, and infant and toddler programs have not been demonstrated to reduce the risk of drowning.

Lessons should include learning how to float and tread water, and children should be taught never to scream for help unless help is really needed (remember the boy who cried wolf). But do not assume that because a child knows how to swim, adult supervision is unnecessary. 

The academy urged that children be taught never to swim alone or without adult supervision. And they should be required to wear a Coast Guard-approved life jacket appropriate for their weight whenever they are in a boat, fishing, or near water and at risk of falling in.

The academy also cautioned parents not to assume that because a child knows how to swim well in one body of water (say, a pool) it is safe for that child to swim in another (a river, a lake, a stream or an ocean). Conditions in different kinds of water create different hazards.

Because adolescents are often out on their own, they should be counseled about the hazards of mixing alcohol and water sports. Up to half the drowning deaths of teenagers are associated with alcohol. 

Teenagers should also be encouraged to learn CPR, which can significantly increase the chance of healthy survival of someone who nearly drowns.

