By now everyone knows — or should know — the importance of protecting the skin and eyes from the sun's ultraviolet radiation: UVB, which burns the skin, and UVA, which ages the skin. Both can cause skin cancer and seriously damage the lens and retina of the eyes.


Since most Americans spend, on average, 80 percent of the day indoors or commuting in private cars, the protection — or lack of it — afforded by windows has become a serious medical matter. And, in combination with energy-saving issues, it has stimulated the development of glass for cars, commercial buildings and homes that is much more protective.

Technology to the Rescue

The sunglass industry, too, now produces lenses that block out the sun's damaging rays, both for sports enthusiasts and casual users. But choosing a pair of sunglasses based solely on how they look can leave your eyes vulnerable to permanent damage.

Dr. Henry W. Lim, a dermatologist at the Henry Ford Medical Center in Detroit, specializes in photoprotection. With Dr. Chanisada Tuchinda and Dr. Sabong Srivannaboon, he prepared an excellent review of the role that glass and lenses can play in protecting from the harm that ultraviolet radiation can cause. The review was published in May in Dermatology, the journal of the American Academy of Dermatology.

Ordinary glass used in homes and commercial buildings filters out UVB radiation, which is why you don't get a sunburn indoors. However, both UVA and infrared radiation, which causes heat, are readily transmitted through standard glass.

The trick in making more protective glass is to allow visible light through while blocking or greatly reducing transmission of both UVA and infrared radiation. This is all the more important now that current architectural trends call for very large windows in homes and offices.

Clear glass allows up to 90 percent of visible light through, and up to 72 percent of harmful ultraviolet radiation and up to 83 percent of solar heat. Making protective improvements in glass often involves some trade-offs.

Tinted glass absorbs up to half of the solar energy it receives (reducing energy costs in warm months) and blocks some ultraviolet radiation. But it also blocks some visible light. Reflective glass, with its mirrorlike effect, minimizes the solar energy and UV rays that get through, but significantly reduces visible light transmission.

Low-emissivity (Low-E) glass, now widely used in residential and commercial buildings, was developed to minimize heating and cooling costs. But while it reduces much of the UVB radiation, UVA gets through unimpeded.

Among the best choices are laminated glass and UV-blocking coated glass. The latter, used in insulating glass units, has an invisible coating that blocks more than 98 percent of UV radiation while transmitting all visible light. 

Laminated glass, made of two pieces of glass with a plastic layer between them, filters out nearly all UV radiation without blocking visible light. It also reduces sound transmission. It is commonly used for automobile windshields and in airports, museums, sound studios, schools, greenhouses and large public arenas.

Finally, there is a glass package — spectrally selective and UV-blocking insulating glass — that blocks more than 99 percent of UV transmission and nearly 70 percent of solar heat gain while allowing 70 percent of visible light through (close to that of standard clear glass). 

Although the laminated windshields of modern cars protect against both UVA and UVB radiation, drivers and passengers can be exposed to a significant amount of UVA radiation that passes through side and rear windows. 

Beyond Driver's Ed

Tinted side windows can screen out much of the UVA; if your car did not come with them, tinted plastic films can be installed as long as they do not reduce visible light transmission by more than 65 percent. At the very least, protect children sitting in the back seats with shades. These are sold in automotive supply stores, and they are easy to attach and remove.

If you are ordering a new car, you may be able to buy it with gray-tinted laminated glass on all side windows. 

