What will the United Kingdom's banking sector look like in a year's time? "Post offices," quips one banking executive. "They will be all that is left."

It is not such an absurd prediction. Despite the government announcing a second rescue package, designed to insulate the leading banks from losses on their bad lending - which some estimate could cost as much as £500bn - and a further cash injection into Royal Bank of Scotland, bank shares continued to plunge. In just a week, more than £20bn was wiped off the value of RBS, Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group, leaving the trio valued at just £17bn put together - or less than the £20.5bn the three raised between them last summer. 

For a while, calls to go the whole hog and nationalise the banks intensified - a point of view summed up by John Greenwood, chief economist at fund manager Invesco Perpetual: "By not removing all the toxic assets of the banks in one fell swoop, for example by injecting them into a 'bad bank', the government is leaving itself open to the risk that the economy and the banks' operating results will deteriorate further, requiring open-ended intervention in the future.

"This means that if the other components of the government's plan for economic recovery - such as its fiscal spending plans, or any quantitative easing by the Bank of England - do not work, then the authorities will gradually be drawn into larger and larger commitments to the banking system. Full-scale nationalisation of several large banks would probably be the ultimate outcome. If this is the case, why not do it immediately?"

For the moment, the government seems set against such a move, insisting that banks are better run by commercial, private-sector managers - although anyone looking at the scale of losses incurred so far, never mind what is still to come, might question that confidence. 

The trouble is that, nationalised or not, investors across the globe are uncertain of Britain's ability to rescue its banks - a worry that is sending sterling falling almost as rapidly as bank shares. The government is refusing to estimate how much its insurance package - under which it will underwrite future credit losses in exchange for a premium, probably paid in bank shares - will cost, but the numbers could be frightening. 

Simon Ward, chief economist at New Star, points out that in October, the Bank of England estimated that British banks could lose £130bn over the next five years, and that was before the economy really started to turn nasty.

Last week's trading update from RBS warned that the worsening economic climate meant bad debts of between £6.5bn and £7bn, with another £8bn in write-offs against the value of toxic assets - far worse than the City had been expecting. And, in a bleak statement, chief executive Stephen Hester warned: "More asset deterioration and significant credit losses seem certain."

Barclays chief executive John Varley insists it is not in such a parlous position - indeed, it says it made a profit of £5.3bn last year. Yet no one is willing to bet that it will be one of the survivors. Its shares more than halved last week alone, and now change hands at less than a tenth of their value last month.

That is despite the fact the bank has been stressing the differences between RBS's investment banking business and its own, Barclays Capital. RBS's capital-markets loan book, at £600bn, is twice as big as that of BarCap's, while its commercial property loan book is also much larger. 

The panic selling of Barclays shares also overlooks the fact that the temporary relaxation of capital requirements by the Financial Services Authority, announced at the start of last week in a bid to help the banks weather the financial storm, is equivalent to an extra £25bn of retained profits, or £20bn in new capital - and possibly as much as £100bn across the banking sector as a whole.

Lord Turner, in his first significant speech since he took over as chairman of the FSA, gave a clear indication that, when this mess is finally cleared up, the banking industry that emerges from the rubble will look very different. 

"Not all innovation is equally useful," he said. "If by some terrible accident the world lost the knowledge required to manufacture one of our major drugs or vaccines, human welfare would be seriously harmed. If the instructions for creating a 'CDO-squared' [a credit derivative manufactured out of other derivatives] have now been mislaid, we will, I think, get along quite well without. 

"And in the years running up to 2007, too much of the developed world's intellectual talent was devoted to ever more complex financial innovations, whose maximum possible benefit was at best marginal, and which in their complexity and opacity created large financial stability risks."

That is a pretty damning obituary for a securitisation market which, according to the Bank of England, was worth more than $600 trillion at the end of 2007. 

The FSA will produce its blueprint for the future of regulation in April, but Turner's speech gave plenty of hints about what it might contain. Regulators were too focused on the risks of individual banks and not enough on how their inter-relationships were increasing financial instability. In future, they will need to make more judgments about the risks inherent in banks' business models. Far more capital needs to be held in support of banks' activities - and they need to put aside larger amounts in the boom years to cushion against the bad.

The banks themselves are already working as fast as economic conditions will permit to shape themselves for the future. Hester will give an outline of his bank's strategic review when it announces its 2008 results on 26 February. But already it is clear that riskier activities - such as lending £1.5bn to Russian oligarchs, trading in complex financial instruments and bankrolling large property projects - will be ditched in favour of increasing mortgage lending, offering pricing pledges to small businesses and - most likely - retaining the Direct Line and Churchill insurance businesses that Hester's predecessor Sir Fred Goodwin was planning to sell.

RBS points out that it has a comparatively small share of the mortgage market and has been able to increase that, even during the downturn. 

It is unlikely to be alone in its intentions: virtually every other international bank is pulling back to old-fashioned core lending and savings business - assuming, of course, that they have managed to survive the costs of pursuing the alternative, high-risk and highly toxic, securitised lending. 

HSBC is aggressively expanding its mortgage loan book in the UK while working out how to rid itself of Household, its sub-prime lending business in the United States. 

Lloyds Banking Group's chief executive Eric Daniels has made it clear that he plans to ditch the high-risk property and private equity lending book acquired with his acquisition of the HBOS banking group as quickly as is possible in such a dismal climate, in favour of back-to-basics banking. 

Only Barclays continues to insist that its investment banking arm can grow and prosper, although it, too, is scaling back on the higher-risk areas. 

In the US, Citigroup has all but ended its quest to be a global universal bank, while Goldman Sachs - the purest of investment banks - has opted for deposit-taking status. And Bank of America is growing increasingly agitated by the losses and bonus culture it is uncovering at Merrill Lynch, the investment bank it rescued earlier this year.

The retail banking sector became even more crowded last week when the mutually-owned Co-operative bank merged with the Britannia building society to create what it describes as "a unique ethical alternative to shareholder- and government-owned banks". While it will still be a relatively small player, it should find it easier to attract depositors who have been horrified by the excesses of the publicly quoted institutions. 

Hester thinks there should still be enough banking business to go round, even when lending volumes get back to normal. Foreign banks - such as those from Iceland and Ireland - and non-banking groups like America's GE Capital, were responsible for as much as 40% of British lending; and, bank bosses insist, it is their departure, rather than British banks' shutting up shop, that has caused the slump in the availability of loan finance here. 

"I think there should still be good business growth," he says. "Obviously, the world is huge and complex and will still have the need for complex financial products, albeit less than there were before, and there will be greater capital scarcity. So even if volumes are lower, the number of players will be fewer and smaller in size, so banks should be able to make a good living. Not as racy a living as for the last decade, but that is no bad thing."

Simply getting to a position where banks can make a living is presenting a big challenge to regulators, bosses and the government. 

Gavin Oldham, chief executive of the Share Centre, thinks one solution would be to temporarily suspend the shares of the leading banks to allow them to work through their problems. He has written to financial services minister Paul Myners to point out that, as the FSA acknowledges, "a very substantial part of bank over-indebtedness lies in the complex web of claims between financial institutions: in other words, not in lending to business or for mortgages. If these claims could be netted off, there would be a massive reduction in the scale of bank losses."

He believes that suspending trading would give them breathing space to unravel these problems. At their current levels, he adds, bank shares are "little more than an option against nationalisation, and do not provide the basis for any further injection of private sector capital to resolve future needs". 

The Share Centre's own customers, however, continue to snap up bank shares as they tumble, betting that even a small improvement in sentiment could lead to a big profit should the prices rise sharply. 

The stock market is taking a very gloomy stance: Bruno Paulson, banking analyst at Bernstein Research, calculates that, based on their capital position, the market price of RBS shares suggests investors consider it has just a 19% chance of survival: at Barclays and Lloyds, the probabilities are 43% and 38% respectively, he says; but that was before the most savage falls of last week.

Six months ago, few investors would have bet that Royal Bank of Scotland would be announcing a loss of close to £30bn - stealing the record for biggest loss by a British company from Vodafone - or that it would end up being 70% owned by the government. That just shows that anything is possible.

