In the six and a half weeks since the Treasury announced its £36bn bail-out of three British banks, Royal Bank of Scotland's shares have dropped 49 per cent, wiping almost £7.5bn off their value, Lloyds TSB's 42 per cent fall has cost shareholders more than £5bn and HBOS's 24 per cent decline has cost about £1.2bn.

But Barclays shares have fallen 55 per cent, slashing £12.5bn off its value, despite the fact that it is not taking up the government's offer but has found new finance elsewhere.

The government-backed banks are paying 1.5 per cent of the value of their share issues to the government in commissions, equal to £225m for RBS, whose £15bn share issue is the largest. Barclays is paying £300m to raise £7bn, a commission rate of 4 per cent, with more than £200m of that going to the two investors - Qatar Holdings and a member of the Abu Dhabi royal family.

It is paying interest at 14 per cent on the £3bn of redeemable capital instruments (RCIs) it is issuing to two Middle East investors as part of the £7bn package, and cannot redeem them until 2019 at the earliest. The state-supported banks are paying 12 per cent, but Lloyds - and HBOS, which Lloyds is in the process of acquiring - think they can redeem theirs next year and RBS the year after.

Assuming that none of the banks' shareholders takes up their entitlements - and the share prices of all three are below their issue prices - the government will end up with 43.5 per cent of the merged Lloyds Banking Group and 57 per cent of RBS. But the aim of its UK Financial Investments unit, which will oversee these stakes, is to sell them as quickly as possible - and for as much as possible. 

Barclays' new shareholders will end up owning more than a quarter of the company, assuming they exercise all the rather generously priced warrants which are part of the fundraising. While Barclays believes the relationship with its new shareholders brings opportunities to win new customers and business, if that proves wrong it has no way of getting rid of them.

Small wonder that tomorrow's extraordinary meeting to approve the share issue promises to be stormy. Three of the most influential investor advisory groups - the Association of British Insurers, RREV and Pirc - have criticised the cost and generous terms of the fundraising. Barclays shareholders are furious that they were not offered the same terms; when the Middle Eastern investors agreed to give up £500m of their RCIs to appease other shareholders, they were snapped up. 

The fundraising is likely to be approved only because there is no real alternative. Barclays shares would collapse even further if the package was voted down, and the government has made it clear that, now it has seen what other investors are demanding to refinance banks, it would significantly increase its terms. It wouldn't even save the fees: the bank has to pay them whether or not the deal is approved.

But shareholders say Barclays should never have got into this position. It could well cost the bank at least one of its bosses - and Barclays is allowing investors to do that by agreeing to put all its executive directors up for re-election at next year's annual meeting. It has certainly cost the top brass their bonuses; executive directors have agreed not to take any such payments this year, including president Bob Diamond, who will have to scrape by on just his £250,000 salary, compared with last year's £25m package. But one shareholder questioned if he would have qualified for a bonus anyway, given that earnings are expected to all but halve this year.

There is no sign of the bank thinking more radically about pay, unlike rivals such as UBS - which is to impose 'maluses' for poor performance as well as 'bonuses' for good. Barclays insiders still insist they have to pay good salaries to keep and motivate key players and that wholesale banking staff will continue to be paid for performance.

Peter Hahn, a former investment banker now at Cass Business School, says the banks' argument that staff would leave unless they were paid generous bonuses was nonsense. 'The number of hedge fund failures is now exceeding those of banks,' he points out. 'If we lose a few highly paid bankers, that is not necessarily a bad thing.' 

Many of Barclays' shareholders agree - and they have the board directors in their sights.
