Stephen Hester has lost £5.5m in the three months since he took over as Royal Bank of Scotland chief executive following the precipitous plunge in its share price. 

Hester was given 10.4 million shares priced at 65p to replace benefits forfeited at his previous employer British Land, as well as a salary of £1.2m a year. With the shares standing at just 12.1p on Friday, these are now worth just £1.26m, down from £6.76m. 

But he says he has no intention of asking the board to change the terms of his package. "In the real world, that would be looked at negatively," said Hester, who pointed out that thousands of RBS employees who owned shares through share-save schemes had suffered "real and painful losses" from the plunge: two years ago, the bank's shares were trading at more than 700p.

RBS, where the government has a controlling 70% stake, warned last week it would make a loss of £27bn in 2008, due to write-offs.

Hester gave a strong hint that he was reconsidering the sale of its insurance arms, Direct Line and Churchill. "If I can get a good price, I will sell, if I cannot my job is to protect shareholder value. In the current environment, I expect it to be rather difficult to get a good price."

Elsewhere, Barclays was in the spotlight after its shares crashed another 14% on Friday to 51p. The sell-off continued despite the bank issuing a bullish statement saying that its 2008 profit would be no less than £5.3bn after write-downs.

Sandy Chen, banking analyst at Panmure Gordon, estimates that Barclays still needs to raise "at least another £9bn" and possibly as much as £15bn, to take account of the plummeting value of investments that include derivatives such as credit default swaps and mortgage-backed securities. Chen said: "Banks face major threats to earnings and further capital pressures."

Barclays, though, has defended its position, saying that its capital ratios "are well ahead of the level required by the FSA".

Nevertheless, Barclays is expected to be part of a government bail-out plan for all the high street banks, which involves insuring them against unexpected future losses.

Government, regulators and banking executives are working on details of the scheme that could be announced as early as this week. The move is designed to head off the possibility of nationalisation of several big players that have seen their shares dive, despite government support.
