Call it the winner's curse. No sooner had Spain's Santander been named the World's Best Bank by Euromoney, and collected the Bank of The Year award from the Banker magazine than its pedestal began to wobble.

Undoubtedly its biggest embarrassment is the revelation that its Swiss-based fund management business was one of the biggest investors in the hedge funds run by Bernard Madoff: Santander's wealthy clients have lost an estimated €2.33bn (£2.2bn) and legal action by them looks a pretty safe bet.

That has dented not just the fearsome reputation of Emilio Botín-Sanz de Sautuola y Garcia de los Rios (Emilio Botín for short), the 73-year-old chairman who built Santander into a global giant, it may also have undermined his chances of sustaining the family dynasty. Botín succeeded his father as chairman in 1986 and, while he deflects questions about his own departure, saying he will stay as long as shareholders want him to, observers were predicting that his daughter, the formidable Ana Patricia, would follow him. But her husband, Guillermo Morenes, ran M&B Capital Advisers, the Swiss bank that marketed the Madoff funds.

While M&B trumpeted its "intensive due diligence" and "detailed scrutiny" of each investment, many other banks were suspicious enough, after even a cursory look at Madoff's practices, to shun the fund. The embarrassment comes as Botín faces growing challenges to his ability to steer through the financial turbulence. Around half the bank's business originates in Latin America which, thanks to the commodity boom and more effective political leadership, had been enjoying a spectacular boom. 

At the end of October, Botín outlined his goal of becoming the number one bank in Brazil, adding: "Brazil has been able to take advantage of the favourable international situation of the last years to pave the way for sustainable future growth. It is inevitable that the impact of the international financial crisis is being felt. However, Brazil's macroeconomic situation is the best in decades."

But in a recent note, analysts at Keefe Bruyette & Woods said: 'Most Latin American capital markets have experienced a steep sell-off, currencies have weakened, commodity prices have fallen, and the overall economic climate has deteriorated."

Spain is in the grip of a housing and property slump. While Santander's reliance on its domestic market is lower than its rivals, it faces mounting losses on its own consumer lending as well as its exposure to residential developers. They account for some 7 per cent of its Spanish loan book and it has had to take on €2.5bn of their assets in exchange for unpaid debts. 

Santander has been lauded for being one of few banks that could prosper from the financial crisis. It has taken advantage of the weakness of most of its rivals to snap up Alliance & Leicester, the savings business of Bradford & Bingley and Sovereign Capital in the US at bargain prices. It was vilified for launching a rights issue just a week after its chief executive Alfredo Sáenz said it did not need to raise new capital, but the €7.2bn rights issue was comfortably subscribed.

It is also the only one of the trio that launched a £49bn joint bid for ABN Amro to have survived more or less intact. Royal Bank of Scotland is now 58 per cent owned by the government, has ejected its chief executive and is likely to have to sell off large parts of its business; Fortis has been broken up and parts of it are also under the control of the Dutch and Belgian governments.

Botín raised the funds to buy the ABN assets by selling 1,200 of its properties across Spain for €4bn just before the market started to crumple. Fortis took on a fund management business now showing the ravages of the stock market crash and RBS was landed with an investment banking business at the top of the market, but Santander's main purchases were in the less turbulent areas of retail banking.

Botín also had a lucky escape with Alliance & Leicester: in January, he was ready to pay £5.50 a share for the former building society but his offer was spurned; less than six months and a tightening credit crunch later, he picked it up for £2.99 a share and a few weeks after that landed B&B's savings book for an even lower price. 

However, those alert for signs of hubris note that the bank has just moved into Santander City, a 370-acre office complex north of Madrid, which boasts a swimming pool, gym, 18-hole golf course, five restaurants, a supermarket and a designer hairdresser.

It is an uncanny echo of Royal Bank of Scotland, which moved into its Gogarburn campus - with its a gym, pool, tennis courts and a shopping street - three years ago. Botín is all too aware of the pain that followed: Santander owns a 2.1 per cent stake in the bank, a legacy of long co-operation between the businesses, and took up its rights issue in the spring, a stake that has lost 90 per cent of its value this year alone.
