Lloyd Blankfein, chief executive of Goldman Sachs, was defiant at an investor meeting last month. The US banking giant was, he said, 'uniquely placed' to survive the current financial crisis. 'We have emerged from every... transformational event stronger and with our core franchise, culture and values intact. The other side of this crisis will be no different,' he insisted.

Not everyone shares his conviction, however, and the detractors will be given extra ammunition on Tuesday, when Goldman is expected to announce the first quarterly loss since it went public in 1999 caused by further huge write-offs on the value of its investments and a fall in revenues as investment banking, sales and trading activity all take a further downturn. Among the most pessimistic is Richard Staite, US banking analyst with Atlantic Equities, who forecasts that it will make a net loss of $2.3bn, compared with $3.2bn profit last time. That is still a far more resilient performance than rivals such as the failed Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, which was swallowed by Bank of America, or Citigroup, which has had to be bailed out by the government. But it still undermines Blankfein's conviction that its integrated banking strategy, providing a range of services from advice to investing in partnership with its clients, can survive the worst financial crisis since the 1929 crash.

'We believe the Goldman franchise remains intact and there is little evidence of a loss of market share,' wrote Staite in a research note. 'However, the current trading environment is exceptionally challenging and there remains uncertainty over the business model, in particular access to funding.'

Goldman's problem is that it is dependent on the wholesale banking market, under which banks raise finance by borrowing from each other or from institutional investors. Since the financial crisis took hold last year, that market has in effect died and many commentators believe it will not recover to anywhere near its previous size. Blankfein accepts that the dearth of wholesale funding is an issue but says it is a problem for the market as a whole 'not [our] business model'. But Goldman's decision to become a bank holding company, with all the extra regulation that involves, indicates he accepts the need for access to a wider range of funding sources.

Already, the bank has transferred $130-$150bn of deposits from elsewhere in the organisation and there has been speculation that it will launch internet accounts, or credit cards, in a bid to build the deposits further. Blankfein told the Merrill Lynch conference that it was looking at three sources for deposit expansion: organic growth, through its private wealth management operation, by distributing its products through third parties, such as brokers or through acquisitions. 

But Staite warns that expanding the deposit base 'will be a slow process if done in an organic manner and the acquisition of a retail bank still seems unlikely'. The bank is also building its asset management business, where the fees are much more predictable than acting as broker for hedge funds, or advising on mergers and acquisitions. But that strategy has been undermined by dismal results from some of the hedge funds such as its Goldman Sachs Liquidity Partners 2007, which fell by 55.3 per cent in the year to the end of October.

Blankfein makes much of its record: its asset management business has grown funds under management from $258bn in 1999 to $863bn at the end of October, while it has expanded its overseas operations. And he boasts that it has signed up 100 new clients in the past year, half of them previously advised by rivals.

But, with activity in financial markets likely to remain subdued and funding scarce, the pressure is on Blankfein to come up with a strategy for the new era - and investors will be hoping for some hints at Tuesday's results briefing. 

Most analysts have ruled out the prospect of it acquiring a retail bank: that would not only fundamentally change Goldman's advisory ethos, it would also expose it to rules for offering universal banking services that its high-flying executives would rather not contemplate. Those high-flying executives are suffering like other bankers - Blankfein and his board colleagues have said they will forgo their bonuses this year. The proportion of revenues being put aside for bonuses elsewhere is higher than last year - Morgan Stanley estimates that salaries and bonuses will take up 49 per cent of its revenues, up from 44 per cent last year. But the plunge in profits means total pay will still be 43 per cent down on last year.

There will be fewer people around to share it: Goldman has already said it is cutting 10 per cent of its workforce and there could be more to come. Lauren Smith, banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette and Woods, wrote in a research note: 'The only relief on an operating basis for Goldman... will be felt from headcount reductions and the resizing of businesses. Asset repricing continues, liquidity remains tight and the delevering of balance sheets will continue. The combination of these factors does not paint a particularly pretty picture for the near term.'
