Stephen Hester, chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland, is promising a "significant restructuring". Some would say that, despite a mere three months in the post, he has achieved that already. The bank has a new chairman-designate in Sir Philip Hampton and its balance sheet has been lightened by as much as £30bn in goodwill and bad debt write-offs. It has made the biggest ever loss by a British company and the bosses of its various businesses have been put on notice that they have to prove their worth if they want to stay. To top it all, the government's stake has been increased from 58 to 70%.

But, dramatic though these announcements have been, they are outweighed by the cultural shift at the bank since Hester arrived. Sir Fred Goodwin - his predecessor and the mastermind of the disastrous deals that have left RBS in its current predicament - ruled by diktat and felt no need to explain his actions, internally or externally. Hester has made himself as available as is possible for someone struggling to wrest a bank from the brink of collapse. 

In just three months, according to insiders, there have been more conference calls and briefings with the senior executive team than there were in the previous six years, while he has made numerous radio and TV appearances to explain last year's disastrous results and hint at his plans for the future. 

One former RBS employee who knows Hester well says: "Fred was revered within the bank as some kind of founding father, and we all wasted a lot of time and energy discussing how to manage him and trying to second-guess how he would react to things. That will not be needed with Hester: he is transparent in his management style and leaves people in no doubt what is expected of them."

Insiders agree: "There is a feeling that he wants to free people up, devolve responsibility and empower them," says one executive. That is a big contrast to the "force of nature" that was the old chief executive.

But Hester is as bright and ambitious as his predecessor. He had earned a good reputation in the City for his stewardship of British Land, and many executives would have been content to serve out a few more years there before taking up the inevitable portfolio of chairmanships and public appointments that would see them into retirement. Instead, he is grappling with restructuring an over-ambitious bank during the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. 

But Hester was keen to rise to the challenge. "If you are a footballer you want to play in the Champions League final. It's the same in business... you want to test yourself against the biggest and most complicated challenges," he said shortly after his appointment. 

But he was also clear about the risks: "Jobs like this are unbelievably stressful, leaving you open to unpleasant scrutiny, and there is a 50% chance it ends in tears, because that is the way the world works. But, as they say, if you can't stand the heat, get out of the kitchen."

Hester is accustomed to taking on demanding roles. At British Land, he succeeded Sir John Ritblat, the charismatic but dictatorial chairman who created the property empire and ran it rather like a family fiefdom, to the consternation of some of its investors. Hester introduced a more transparent culture, ditched its palatial offices for a more utilitarian building and made a number of astute acquisitions.

He was even more revolutionary at Abbey National, the former building society, where he was brought in as finance director to help rescue it from the brink of collapse with disposals and rationalisation, before selling it to Spanish bank Santander.

A colleague from that time describes him as "dynamic and sharp-witted, a brilliant strategic thinker". He adds that, while Santander's ethos could be described as shareholder-friendly, Hester's was more customer-focused: in the insurance business, for example, he decided against actions that, while legitimate, would have left policyholders in a poorer position than they might have expected.

Hester is taking a £1.2m salary from RBS but will be hoping that the real reward will come from the 10.4m shares he was granted on arrival. He may be disappointed. They were priced at 65p, the price at which the government subscribed for shares in October; last week they were changing hands for less than a fifth of that and, with the calls for full nationalisation growing, may end up worthless.

Not that Hester needs the money. His first job after Oxford - where he gained a first in politics and economics - was as assistant to the chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston. He went on to become its youngest-ever managing director, at 35. Then he became chief financial officer and finally head of fixed income before being culled when John Mack, "the Knife", took over. But the bonuses earned during that period were generous enough to help him buy a Swiss ski chalet, a house in London and a 350-acre estate, complete with landscaped gardens, in Oxfordshire. His passion for gardening in general, and trees in particular, is reflected in his trusteeship of the Kew Foundation of the Royal Botanic Gardens. 

He also enjoys riding - his wife is a master of foxhounds - tennis and shooting. That may explain the jacket he wore to last weekend's meetings with chancellor Alistair Darling - an outfit which, apparently got just two out of 10 on his daughter's measure of sartorial elegance. 

Having turned 48 in December, Hester has plenty of time to prove he can succeed in his latest and most difficult corporate challenge. But there is a significant risk it will outfox even him.
