Experts at Britain's leading fund management groups say it's going to be a grisly year. Jeremy Tigue, manager of the Foreign & Colonial Investment Trust, warns that we are in for a "protracted and debilitating recession" throughout 2009 and into 2010. And almost a quarter of the fund managers polled by the Association of Investment Companies think that the FTSE 100 index will be below 4,000 a year from now.

Edward Bonham Carter, chief investment officer of Jupiter Asset Management, says the market will take the shape of a ladle: a steep dip down into its "spoon", which we are currently suffering; a recovery to well below previous highs; then years in which shares effectively go sideways with the odd bump up and down. That, he says, will mirror what happened between 1966 and 1982, when it took 16 years for the stockmarket to convincingly exceed the levels of the mid-1960s.

There is the odd optimist trying to make a case for putting your money in equities in 2009. Sanjeev Shah, manager of Fidelity's Special Situations Fund, borrows the contrarian credentials of his predecessor, investment guru Anthony Bolton, saying that he is "more optimistic about stockmarket opportunities than I have [been] for a while". He points to a wave of share-buying by directors - often a sign that prices are in a trough. He is buying a basket of banking stocks, together with retail and media companies.

Others are steering clear of Britain and looking elsewhere. The US, where the crisis started, is expected to be the first country to recover. Tom Walker, manager of Martin Currie's US portfolios, points to the £540bn the US government is pumping in to buy distressed housing assets and support small businesses. He says: "The US could lead other developed economies out of the current slowdown."

Among emerging markets, Russia is likely to be "terrible", according to Tigue, as the plunging oil price exposes its excessive reliance on the commodity. Asian financial markets rapidly debunked the myth that they could "decouple" from the economies of the rest of the world, losing half their value on average since they peaked in October 2007, but there are still hopes that they can emerge from the global recession more quickly than the west. Andrew Beal, manager of Henderson's TR Pacific Investment Trust, says: "In general, the region has well-capitalised banks, government debt levels are low and high savings rates mean that most countries in the region still run healthy current account surpluses."

While government bonds in general, and US ones in particular, have been in great demand, corporate bonds for even highly rated companies have fallen sharply on fears of a dramatic rise in defaults. James Gledhill, head of fixed-income investments at New Star, is one of many fund managers who think this has now gone far enough. "Corporate defaults are likely to rise in 2009 but the extent of the rise in bond yields and decline in bond prices over the last year has gone way beyond anything that is reasonable," he says. 

With most corporate bonds trading considerably below their maturity value, there is an opportunity for investors to lock into some significant capital gains once sentiment improves, while receiving highly attractive yields.

It is hardly surprising that none of the Observer's panel of fund management professionals managed to pick a share that rose during 2008, but four out of the seven did at least manage to beat the market.

Leading the pack was Lesley Duncan of Standard Life, whose choice - recruitment company Michael Page - fell 14 per cent during the year, well below the 33 per cent decline in the FT All Share. In second and third were Colin McLean of Edinburgh-based SVM and Jim Wood-Smith of Williams de Broe. Both chose resources companies - BG and BP respectively - and ended up 19 and 20 per cent down. Next came Robert Talbut of Royal London, whose tip, Reed Elsevier, lost 24 per cent. John Hatherly, a consultant for Seven, lost 47 per cent on BT. Bringing up the rear were the two fund managers who chose banks: Max Ward of the Independent Investment Trust Plc and Baillie Gifford's Patrick Edwardson.

• This article was amended on Sunday 11 January 2009. We said Max Ward worked for the Scottish Investment Trust (SIT). He is actually managing director of the Independent Investment Trust Plc. This has been corrected.
