Proposals by the British government to relax protection for pension scheme members during company restructurings could breach European regulations, experts have warned.

Adam Bushby, pensions partner at business law firm LG, said last week's proposal represented a 'dramatic turnaround' from the current position of giving full protection to scheme members. He added that it could contravene the European IORP directive on retirement provision, which requires companies to fully fund such liabilities. That could leave the government open to a legal challenge if it goes ahead with the plans.

In a discussion paper last week, the Department for Work and Pensions said that it might consider proposals to reduce that protection where companies are doing an internal restructuring or group reorganisation.

But John Harvey, a partner with Hewitt Associates, said: 'The challenge is not to inadvertently introduce loopholes. If there are any, they will be exploited. When companies are in financial difficulties, they often have no option but to do everything they can to maximise benefits to shareholders. 

'[There should still be] tough rules for those trying to walk away from their [pension] liabilities.'

The DWP is asking for comments on whether such proposals should be included in a consultation paper, which will be published in the spring. Trade unions have already expressed their concern. 

Brendan Barber, general secretary of the TUC, said: 'There seems to be a pretty clear choice here. Either companies meet their pension scheme liabilities or they don't. We doubt that any review can overcome this fundamental point.'

The existing legislation was introduced four years ago to close a loophole which allowed companies to evade their pensions liabilities. It was sparked by the case of Danish shipping group Maersk, which tried to walk away from the pension obligations of its UK business, despite the fact that it remained solvent.

The rules force companies in a restructuring to pay enough into their pension funds to allow it to finance a buyout of the scheme by an insurance company, the most secure option for members. 

The DWP is suggesting that this could be relaxed to allow companies to negotiate an agreement with trustees, or to fund to the level required by the Pension Protection Fund - which is significantly below the buyout level.
