Thirty years ago, women were not allowed to eat at most City restaurants unless they were the guest of a male member of the club; the City's boardrooms and trading floors were just as restrictive, with women mainly confined to roles as secretaries and other supporting positions.

It was in that cloistered and conservative atmosphere that a handful of the women who had broken into positions of authority in the City decided to get together to set up an alternative to the 'old boys' network' of school ties and golf clubs that then held such sway in the Square Mile.

Initially given the ironic title of 'The Little Ladies', it quickly became the City Women's Network (CWN), which celebrates its 30th anniversary with a gala dinner on Thursday, with Cherie Booth appearing as guest speaker.

'Most women at that time had not even got to the stage of being resigned,' says Joni Lysett Nelson, one of the CWN's founders. 'They thought they were in a small circle and that it was not possible to move out of that circle.'

An American, she arrived in London as a partner from an international law firm with headquarters in New York. 'To my surprise, I discovered that very few women in London at that time were in the legal profession, and even fewer business leaders were female.' 

The CWN was born during an informal lunch between Nelson and a couple of other senior City women, at which the problem of identifying like-minded women, let alone sharing experiences with them, was discussed. The difficulty of booking restaurants meant that meetings had to be held in corporate boardrooms; that also satisfied a need to keep the network secret at the start, for fear of upsetting the male establishment. 

'You might be surprised to learn that some women could not safely receive our mailings at the office; others could not safely receive them at home; some had no safe option whatsoever and just had to be telephoned,' Nelson recalls.

Monica Fisher, another founding member and a former executive with Bank of America and First National Bank of Chicago, says that initially about half the members were American, reflecting both the relatively better position of women in that country, as well as their need to develop contacts overseas. 'There have been times when we have been more interested in lobbying. There was a time when we had a feminist element.'

But she thinks one of its greatest achievements has been to survive. Thirty years ago, the CWN was the only network for women in this area; today they are ubiquitous. Virtually every industry, from engineering to advertising, has one, as does virtually every City bank, accountancy or law firm and most multinationals. But, says current CWN president Claire Dobie, it still has an important role. 'Our members may also belong to their own company networks but it can be helpful and stimulating to talk to people from outside. And you could want to say things that you would not necessarily want to discuss with your colleagues.'

Now many men are happy to be enrolled in the effort to promote women. The CWN's Lord Stevenson, chairman of HBOS, Donald Brydon, chairman of Taylor Nelson Sofres, and EasyJet chief executive Andy Harrison all attended a recent anniversary breakfast at the Mansion House in London. Herta von Stiegel, a former senior executive at JP Morgan and Citibank, says: 'We have critical mass and we have enrolled men who are prepared to use their influence to advance women.'

While women's position in the City has changed radically since the CWN was launched in 1978, there is still much to be done. While the number of women on the boards of public companies is rising, the rate of progress makes a snail seem athletic: the latest figures will be released later this month but, at the last count, just 14 per cent of FTSE 100 directors were women - and most of those non-executive. Ruth Sealy, a CWN member and researcher at the International Centre for Women Business Leaders at the Cranfield School of Management, says her work on investment banks indicates that the number of women at MD level ranges from 5 to 15 per cent, yet females account for between 40 and 60 per cent of the annual intake. 

Kate Grussing, managing director of Sapphire Partners, a recruitment agency that specialises in placing women, admits that the high-profile sex discrimination cases that City women have won in recent years has made women's advancement 'much more difficult'. But she adds: 'To be successful in the City as a man or a woman, there is no doubt you have to be very good and very resilient. If someone says something rude, it is no good going directly to the HR department. That is where women's networks play a very important role - you may not have another woman in the organisation you can raise these issues with.'

Ultimately, the aim of organisations such as the CWN must be to become redundant as gender ceases to be an issue in the workforce. We are a long way from that. But, as Joni Lysett Nelson says: 'Who knows? Maybe one day we will just be a footnote in business history.'
