An extraordinary war of words broke out last night over the planned takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB after two former bank chiefs claimed that keeping the bank independent would save more than 20,000 jobs and be better for Britain.

Sir Peter Burt and Sir George Mathewson, former chief executives of the Bank of Scotland and Royal Bank of Scotland respectively, have written to HBOS calling for its chairman, Lord Stevenson, and chief executive, Andy Hornby, to resign. 

Burt said their proposal to stay independent would 'take HBOS back to what its core business should be', while recruiting a new management team to run the bank. 

In a late intervention, the chairman of HBOS last night announced that the board had unanimously rejected the proposal. 

The clash is embarrassing for the government, since it raises fresh questions over whether a merger that ministers supported - and Gordon Brown championed - offers good value for taxpayers or if it will needlessly result in the loss of thousands of jobs. Even if the new proposal fails, it could still delay the takeover process that ministers want resolved quickly in order to kick-start lending to businesses and homeowners. 

Burt and Mathewson have already approached Treasury officials who have not ruled out their proposal. The Treasury, however, suggested that, if HBOS shareholders voted down Lloyds TSB's original £12bn bid in favour of an alternative proposal, it would be a commercial decision which would be accommodated. But it warned that the boards of both Lloyds TSB and HBOS had backed the merger and that shareholders had also indicated their support.

Scotland's First Minister, Alex Salmond, who has repeatedly questioned the merger proposals, welcomed the intervention by two of Scotland's most senior financiers and added: 'The position of the Scottish government is very clear. We will respond to all propositions for the future of HBOS on exactly the same basis, which is: what they will mean for numbers of jobs, the extent of decision-making and competition for business and personal customers in the wider Scottish economy?'

The audacious approach is aimed at persuading HBOS's board to abandon the £12bn takeover by Lloyds TSB, which was agreed a month before the government unveiled its £400bn support package for Britain's banks. That package, the bankers believe, means that HBOS can now survive on its own.

'The terms of the takeover are unfair to HBOS shareholders and we believe there are better options available, which the board should explore. The failure to do so is to sacrifice the opportunity for shareholders to recover substantial lost value,' the bankers write in the letter. 

Lloyds TSB has refused to comment on the number of jobs which will be lost in the takeover but it has promised to save £1.5bn, or about 16 per cent of the combined cost base. That would imply that more than 22,000 of the combined 142,000 workforce could go. 

Jim Spowart, the Scottish financier who is trying to broker a rival bid from a Spanish bank, says that as many as 100,000 Scottish jobs could be threatened through the knock-on effect on other professional services.

In a return letter yesterday, Lord Stevenson told the two bankers: 'The board has unanimously concluded that your letter does not form the basis of any further discussion between us.' 

Mathewson, who served as chief executive and chairman at RBS before stepping down in 2006, dismissed Lord Stevenson's response, saying: 'I do not think it makes any difference to us. It is what we suspected. I think we will contact some shareholders and ask them what they feel about the proposal.' 

An influential shareholder told The Observer that he did not believe shareholders would reject the Lloyds takeover: 'The only thing that could partially scupper this is if it really turns into the preservation of a Scottish national champion.'
