Banking giant HSBC is tomorrow expected to announce that it wrote off more than $3.5bn (£2.2bn) against bad US loans, on top of the $6.7bn provided in the first half. And investors will be anxiously scanning the trading statement for signs that the financial crisis is spreading to its Asian business.

The bank's shares have tumbled by 17 per cent in the past month on fears that its emerging markets businesses - which had been shrugging off the global financial downturn - will start to slow, and suffer rising bad debts. 

'We are seeing signs of stress in Asia,' said Ian Gordon, banking analyst at BNP Paribas. 'The issue is what the scale of write-downs and losses will be.'

The bank, led by chief executive Michael Geoghegan, issues a third-quarter trading update for the group, and third-quarter results for its US business, tomorrow. While the provisions against delinquent mortgages are likely to have peaked, analysts are expecting a sharp rise in losses on its credit cards, car loans and other consumer lending. Friday's US jobless figures showed unemployment rising for the 10th consecutive month to 6.5 per cent of the population.

Gordon is predicting $3.8bn of write-downs in the third quarter but he believes that could be too conservative.

HSBC is one of the only British banks still paying a dividend, after rivals Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland have had to go to the government for funding. But analysts at ING point out that the drip in profits as bad debts rise and Asia slows mean its dividend will only be thinly covered by earnings. Profits for the current year are expected to be around a quarter lower than last year. 

'This may be unsustainable over several years, implying a dividend cut. HSBC will be steeled to resist this pressure since its smaller emerging markets rival, Standard Chartered, has been delivering metronomic dividend growth in recent years of 11 per cent,' the analysts said. 

HSBC was one of the first banks to flag big losses on US mortgages, with a $10.6bn write-down early last year. In total, it has reported $27.4bn of write-downs in the crisis.

In October, the bank, which is not part of the government bail-out of the sector, revealed plans to axe more than 500 London jobs. The redundancies are part of a programme of cutbacks in its global banking and market division. HSBC irritated the government recently when it said that it couldn't guarantee it would pass on all rate cuts to customers, saying rates must reflect the cost to the bank of its own borrowing.
