After the near-vertical drop in share prices over the past 12 months, now might seem as good a moment as any for investors to fill their boots with cheap assets; but only the bold are betting on a rapid recovery in financial markets. Many equity funds have declined in value even over 10 years, in what analysts are calling a "lost decade" for shares - and some are beginning to wonder whether shattered confidence will ever recover.

With just a week to go before this year's Isa deadline, there are few signs of resurgent optimism. In 2000, at the height of the dotcom boom, 4.6 million people put more than £16bn into share-based Isas in Britain. Last year, the number of savers had dropped to 3.2 million, and they invested a third less than at the start of the decade. Indeed, taking into account investors cashing in their savings, there has been a net outflow of funds from equity Isas every year since 2004.

With interest rates at a rock bottom 0.5%, pressure is mounting on Alistair Darling to help savers. The fund management industry is calling for him to use next month's budget to improve tax breaks and make Isas more attractive.

The Investment Management Association (IMA) and the Association of British Insurers want an increase in the investment limit from £7,200 a year to £9,600, which they say would restore its value, allowing for inflation, to the level when Isas were introduced in 1999. 

Fidelity, the largest manager of equity Isas, wants Alistair Darling to restore the ability to reclaim tax paid on dividends on shares held within an Isa. It claims that the withdrawal of this tax exemption in 2004 is the key reason for the dramatic decline in sales since then.

Others, however, think the decline is less to do with low limits or reduced tax incentives as falling stockmarkets and the industry's own short-sightedness. The peak sales of Isas coincided almost exactly with the peak of the technology boom, when investors piled into dotcom companies and investment managers were promoting their technology funds or launching new ones. Fund managers had to hire temporary staff to cope with the flood of retail investors' money.

No sooner had their cash been cashed than the bubble burst, stockmarkets tumbled and technology firms collapsed, taking the value of the new breed of technology funds with them. While stockmarkets rallied for more than four years from the bottom of the last bear market in 2003, many technology funds did not regain their previous highs. 

The rally did not last long enough to block investors' memory of the crash and neither Isa nor retail fund sales generally recovered. For many investors, the current financial meltdown has simply reinforced the view that shares are not worth the risk, and the performance of many funds over the past decade suggests they are right. The average UK All Companies fund, for example, has lost more than 10% over the past decade. The Henderson Global Technology, launched just as the bubble peaked, has fallen an average of 1.83% a year, considerably worse than what you could have earned by simply putting money in a cash Isa. 

Phil Wagstaff, global head of distribution for Gartmore, said the industry had lost "a significant number of investors" because of that bubble and had not done itself any favours by encouraging them into technology funds.

While this is likely to be a far better time to put money into the market than 2000, Wagstaff says investor psychology makes it hard to convince them. "Everyone knows that the way to make money is to buy at the bottom and sell at the top. But most people only want to invest in things that have gone up - professional and retail investors find it more difficult to buy after the market has gone down."

The fact that so many funds are showing losses even after a decade means that the sole remaining tax incentive for an Isa - exemption from capital gains tax - is effectively worthless. Indeed, many observers would question whether the CGT exemption is useful even in a raging bull market given that the first £9,600 of profits in any one year are tax-free.

Rob Fisher, head of personal investments at Fidelity, believes the removal of the dividend tax credit is a big deterrent: "The fact that Isas moved from being tax-free to tax-efficient did make people wonder whether they are worth it."

Fidelity estimates that removing the tax credit saved just £200m a year - "a drop in the ocean in the context of recent events, but the negative impact on Britain's savings culture has been much greater than this". Restoration of the perk could help the government to encourage more savings by consumers. 

This Isa season (the deadline for using this year's tax allowance is next Sunday) may be a bit better than last, but that has more to do with the actions of the Bank of England than a renewed enthusiasm for equity funds. 

The dramatic fall in bank lending rates means that the returns on cash Isas have also plummeted; the best are paying around 3.5% but most are well below 3%. Anyone looking for a decent level of income is being forced to consider bonds or shares. 

"There has been a lot more interest in what else you can do with your money," says Ben Lundie, head of the Vantage fund supermarket for Hargreaves Lansdown. "A lot has flowed into fixed interest [gilt and corporate bond] funds."

IMA statistics underline that: bond funds have been the best sellers for the past three months, so much so that some commentators have warned of a bubble now inflating in this sector. That would chime with retail investors' propensity for getting in at the top of the market - and may prove the death knell for Isas.
