Sir Fred Goodwin, departing chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland, called it 'more of a drive-by shooting' than a negotiation; another banking executive likened it to lobbing a nuclear bomb at the industry.

The military analogies are appropriate enough. Five men have so far fallen victim to the £37bn rescue package drawn up by the government to rescue three of Britain's biggest banks - Sir Fred, his chairman Sir Tom McKillop, and Johnny Cameron, the head of his investment banking arm, along with HBOS's chairman Lord Stevenson and chief executive Andy Hornby. And the pain of the bail-out will have spread far further before the banks can claim to have returned to health.

There are the taxpayers, for example, who are already coughing up some £6,700 each to finance the £400bn rescue plan and are likely to face the lethal combination of higher taxes to fund the deal and rising unemployment as the banks are forced to retrench, restructure and repair the damage from two decades of profligate expansion. 

Some of that unemployment will emanate from the banks themselves. Stephen Hester, the British Land chief executive parachuted in to take over from Goodwin, will not reveal the detail of his strategy until the new year. But it is already clear that large swathes of the business will be deemed too risky and capital-intensive - including areas such as syndicated loans, structured credit and proprietary trading. That could mean significant job losses among the 25,000 employees of the global markets and investment banking business.

He is also likely to be looking for businesses to sell. The sale of the Direct Line and Churchill insurance businesses is already well under way, but some have suggested that he may even consider selling Citizens, its US banking business - though insiders point out that its largely retail franchise is a reliable source of capital.

Hester himself says that the business will have to become more focused on the UK - last year, 40 per cent of its revenues came from outside Britain, and that was before the acquisition of Dutch bank ABN Amro - although he insists that does not mean it will shed all its overseas assets. 

The cuts will not be confined to RBS: staff at HBOS and Lloyds TSB - and even Barclays - are likely to be waiting nervously for the tap on the shoulder and the redundancy letter. Lloyds' chief Eric Daniels has dismissed earlier suggestions that as many as 40,000 of the combined 140,000 workforce are under threat as a result of the merger, but the stark profits warning that accompanied HBOS's £12bn capital-raising from the government suggests that there could end up being even more casualties as Britain's biggest mortgage lender is forced into a painful retrenchment.

HBOS says there has been a 'significant deterioration in credit conditions and falling property prices with associated increased provisioning'. It added that profits would also be hit by more write-offs on toxic loans and higher funding costs. That alone would have justified Lloyds TSB rewriting the terms of its acquisition had Daniels not already got a cast-iron excuse: while Hornby had asked the government for just £3bn, the government - backed by the regulators - insisted it needed four times that, more than double what Lloyds TSB itself is raising. Combined with the collapse in HBOS's share price since the deal was announced, Daniels barely had to bother with brinkmanship tactics as Hornby and Stevenson quickly realised they had nothing left to bargain with. They had no choice but to accept a scaling-back of the offer from 0.833 Lloyds shares for every HBOS one to 0.605.

Despite the downgrading, Daniels will have to work hard to prove it was a bargain. Two months ago, his bank was being hailed as one of the few survivors from the bruising credit crunch: its focus on the UK market and conservative lending strategy meant it had avoided the high-risk lending and toxic assets that have brought rivals to their knees.

But its takeover of HBOS has highlighted its own short-term financing problems: while HBOS was the most dependent of the remaining high-street banks on raising funds from the wholesale markets, rather than from depositors, Lloyds is next in line: combining the two simply makes Lloyds TSB more risky.

As Ian Gordon, banking analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, says, the government's rescue package has exposed 'one myth - that of Lloyds TSB's supposed superior ability to raise capital and funding. Lloyds TSB is now completely reliant on the good faith of the government if it wishes to pay a dividend to ordinary shareholders at any point in the next five years before it is able to call the preference shares itself.'

The dividend issue is a particularly contentious one: while banks and their investors are pressing the government to water down its condition that the banks repay the £9.5bn of preference shares being issued as part of the deal, the government is reluctant to allow any concessions which mean that shareholders take money out of the company while taxpayers are still providing support. But without at least some prospect of a dividend, it will be hard to persuade existing investors to take up any of the new shares, increasing the cost to the taxpayer. That means some reinterpretation of the rules looks inevitable. 

The 'gold-plated' capital requirements set by the government meant that Barclays chief executive John Varley decided against taking up the government's offer to subscribe for preference shares, preferring instead to raise £6.6bn from existing and new shareholders by next March. He has been making the most of his bank's ability to go it alone, claiming that his rivals will be 'hobbled' by what is effectively state control; if existing shareholders eschew the capital-raising, the government will end up with close to 60 per cent of Royal Bank of Scotland and more than 40 per cent of a combined HBOS and Lloyds TSB. 

Certainly, Barclays appears to have escaped too much damage from the crisis. RBS joined HBOS in issuing a stark profits warning, saying its results will be below what it expected when it announced interim results in July and warns that there could be more write-downs to come - particularly, the City assumes, with a new chief executive at the helm. Barclays, by contrast, said its profit in September had 'significantly exceeded' the run-rate for the first six months of the year. Bob Diamond, its forceful president and head of its capital markets business, has also won plaudits for 'bottom-fishing' by buying the US business of Lehman Brothers from the receivers after it went bust last month.

But the Exane analysts point out that its write-downs are markedly lower than at RBS. While the Scottish bank has written its holding of asset-backed securities and other toxic mortgage assets down to as little as 21p in the pound, Barclays' are still at more than 60p. While that may reflect older, and therefore better-quality, holdings, there is still considerable suspicion that far more provisions will be needed.
