Is it a case of unlucky 13 for Barclays chief executive John Varley? That is the rate of interest, after tax, the bank is paying two investors from the Gulf to subscribe for £7bn of new capital in Barclays, a deal which was intended to protect the bank from government intervention but which could end up costing Varley his job.

The bank's shareholders made their fury clear to Varley and his chairman, Sir Marcus Agius, at an acrimonious meeting, brokered by the Association of British Insurers, on Friday. 'Varley has seriously miscalculated' and 'the reputation of the company and its management has been severely tarnished' were two of the more polite comments.

Shareholder fury is linked to their impotence: while they can vote the deal down at an emergency general meeting on 24 November, that would risk doing severe damage to both the bank and the value of their shareholding. The Gulf investors - the Qatar Investment Authority and Abu Dhabi's Sheikh Mansour Bin Zayed Al Nahyan - have a legal deal and show no inclination to accept any alteration of their terms. 

The best other investors can hope is that Barclays decides to raise a bit extra so they can buy some of the lucrative instruments. While that was being suggested last week, it is believed to be unlikely. One banking source pointed out that investors are generally anxious to discourage banks for issuing too much capital, to prevent them squandering it. And the terms of this capital-raising are so onerous it makes sense to raise the lowest amount possible.

The terms certainly look sweet for the Gulf shareholders. The £3bn of Reserve Capital Instruments will pay interest at 14 per cent - 13 per cent after tax - until 2019. That is not only more than the 12 per cent Lloyds TSB, HBOS and Royal Bank of Scotland are paying the government on the £8bn of preference shares they are issuing, but these three banks are expected to repay their prefs within 18 months. Barclays is on the hook for 10 years.

The £4.3bn of convertibles look equally generous: the two investors will be able to convert them into ordinary shares, giving them ownership of more than a third of the bank, by next June at 153.26p, more than 3 per cent lower than they have traded in the past year.

Varley cannot be confident that, by eschewing the government's capital, it can avoid interference in its business. He did not escape being hauled before Gordon Brown, along with other chief executives, to be told they had to pass on the full benefits of the latest interest rate cut to their customers. Neither is the bank likely to escape other strictures imposed as the recession bites. 

It may have avoided the curbs on bonuses which have been imposed on RBS and HBOS as part of the price of government support, but the pay arrangements for Bob Diamond, Barclays' £20m-a-year president, and his wholesale banking staff will be scrutinised by the Financial Services Authority, which has made it clear it thinks big bonuses increase business risks.

Investors also point out that, while the government may be able to intervene while they are shareholders, their intention is to stop being shareholders as quickly as possible. And all indications from Sir Philip Hampton and John Kingman, who will run UK Financial Investments - which will oversee the government's bank stakes - is that they will intervene as little as possible.

Barclays, by contrast, will be left with a number of large shareholders who will remain on the register indefinitely. While there is no indication that the Qataris, the Abu Dhabi royal family or the Chinese, Japanese and Signaporese investors, who will collectively own 38.5 per cent of the bank when these transactions are completed, will want to intervene in the bank's business, their shareholdings are so large they would be able to dictate everything from dividend policy to the composition of the board, should they chose to.

Barclays was clearly taken unawares by the furore. It has asked its shareholders for funds twice this year, only to be largely ignored. A placing in the summer attracted subscriptions from just 19 per cent of its shareholders - the remainder was taken up by the QIA and other strategic investors including Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation and China Development Bank. A £2.5bn placing following its purchase of Lehman Brothers' US investment banking business was scaled back to £2bn because of a lack of investor interest. 

But, shareholders retort, none of these was on such attractive terms as the current issue. Locking in a 14 per cent return for 10 years, when global interest rates are falling, is extremely attractive. And, if Barclays proves as resilient to the financial crisis as it claims, a subscription price of 153.26p next June could look like a real bargain. 

The onus is on Varley to prove that the deal can bring benefits to all shareholders, not just line the pockets of a handful of people in the Middle East. If he fails, questions over his stewardship will become even more pressing.
