Ever since legendary investor Warren Buffett put up to $10bn into US investment bank Goldman Sachs last month, everyone from former Financial Services Authority chief Howard Davies to the BBC's Robert Peston has been urging our government to follow his lead. The government has emulated Buffett in offering to subscribe to preference shares in any bank seeking capital - though whether it will get the 10 per cent dividend Goldman is paying on its preference issue remains to be seen. 

But Buffett is also getting warrants to subscribe for $5bn of new Goldman shares at any time in the next five years at a price of $115, or roughly the price they are currently trading at, an option that could be extremely valuable. This illustrates that last week's £400bn plan is a rescue of a handful of weak banks by a desperate government while Buffett's Goldman purchase is yet another shrewd move by one of the world's most successful investors.

Goldman is not the only business he has been buying into. His Berkshire Hathaway empire rescued Constellation Energy Group, took a 10 per cent stake in China's largest manufacturer of disposable batteries and is investing up to $6bn in General Electric in a preference share and warrant arrangement that mirrors the Goldman deal.

They are vintage Buffett deals. Shares in both Goldman and GE have all but halved over the past year and both needed to bolster their balance sheets. Buffett is not only buying cheaply now, and earning generous interest, he is locking in the chance to buy cheap for another five years.

The Constellation deal is similarly bottom-fishing. It owns three nuclear power plants as well as one of the leading development companies in the field. Berkshire Hathaway already has extensive interests in electricity and gas but Buffett has said nuclear is too expensive. Constellation, too, is a credit crunch victim; its shares plunged as investors feared it would be unable to get a $2bn credit facility needed for its energy trading operation. 

There is speculation that Buffett is poised to snap up yet more bargains. He is rumoured to be interested in buying some of the assets put up for sale by insurance giant AIG, which is having to break itself up to repay the government following its $85bn bail-out - indeed, his comment that shares were starting to look cheap was enough to give the US stock market a fillip this month.

What he does not seem to be interested in is stakes in British banks with large portfolios of overvalued property and private equity assets, or expensive and ambitious Dutch acquisitions to integrate. That is being left to the taxpayer - and the government seems unlikely to secure as good a return on these deals as Buffett is likely to get.
