A year ago, Halifax was offering customers of Lloyds TSB £100 to swap to one of its current accounts. Last week, Lloyds TSB said it was shelling out around £600 for every one of the 22 million customers of Halifax and Bank of Scotland in a £13.2bn takeover of the HBOS banking giant.

This is not an expensive case of tit for tat: rather it is a potent symbol of the impact the credit crunch is having on the banking industry. As recently as a month ago, a merger between HBOS and Lloyds TSB would have been unthinkable: together, they will have 28 per cent of the mortgage market, operate one in three current accounts held by British consumers and own two of the strongest brands in life assurance in Scottish Widows and Clerical Medical. Yet the Office of Fair Trading, which blocked Lloyds TSB's attempt to acquire the much smaller Abbey National seven years ago, has been forced by the government to wave this deal through.

While HBOS chairman Lord Stevenson angrily rebuffed suggestions that the bank was on its knees, the haste with which the deal was stitched up - encouraged and aided by the government and the Financial Services Authority - reflected serious concerns that Britain's biggest mortgage lender could be forced out of business. And while its senior executives were touring the television studios insisting that it had plenty of capital, the City was sending its shares spiralling to a low of just 88p, a third of the price at which it issued new shares as recently as July and a fraction of the 1,165p achieved little over a year ago.

While there was no immediate danger of its running out of money, more than half of its funding provisions- a colossal £156bn - was due to mature within a year. With financial markets in turmoil following the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the effective nationalisation of AIG, investors were betting that, even if it could roll over those facilities, it would be at exorbitant rates. And investors had shunned its £4bn capital-raising in July so were unlikely to be responsive to another rights issue. That left it dangerously exposed.

It also left Eric Daniels, the urbane American chief executive of Lloyds TSB, with the opportunity of a lifetime. Having spent most of his five years at the helm selling assets and restoring Lloyds' reputation following the ill-conceived purchase of Scottish Widows, he was on the acquisition trail. His interest in acquiring Northern Rock last year foundered on a lack of government support; he had considered Bradford & Bingley and Alliance & Leicester but they were too small to make a real difference, even without the concerns about their buy-to-let lending and risky financial structures. 

He had held talks with HBOS during the summer but any deal would have been referred immediately to the Competition Commission - and, with the markets in their febrile state, he would not contemplate subjecting the bank to that long period of uncertainty. 

All that changed last week when Lloyds TSB chairman Sir Victor Blank met Gordon Brown at a Citigroup reception in Canary Wharf on Monday; Blank was left in little doubt that the government viewed a banking monopoly as preferable to another Northern Rock-style nationalisation fiasco and would give its nod to any deal. Talks between the two banks resumed and, with HBOS's shares in freefall, the announcement was rushed out on Thursday morning.

Sir Victor said that both customers and employees would benefit from 'being part of this great enterprise'. Both these parties are unconvinced. HBOS's aggressive attempts to win banking customers from the Big Four - a strategy pioneered by HBOS chief executive Andy Hornby when he was head of the bank's retail business - had brought big benefits in the shape of high interest current accounts, attractive deals for small businesses and generous mortgage promises. Consumer watchdogs think these deals will quickly disappear from the merged business.

Daniels told The Observer yesterday that he expected there to be big opportunities to boost the revenue of the combined group. 'With our big distribution network and complementarity of branches I think we can serve customers extremely well.' 

But analysts fear that attrition is more likely: combined, the two groups already have relationships with four consumers out of 10 and it is likely that these have already been subject to concerted attempts at cross-selling.

Employees, too, are worried. While Daniels dismissed suggestions that 40,000 of the 140,000 combined workforce could go, he has said he expects to cut around 10 per cent, or £1bn, of costs, implying 14,000 redundancies. The City believes that is far too conservative - RBS cut 20 per cent of costs when it acquired the admittedly much less efficient NatWest. The slump in the mortgage market means that HBOS was already shedding jobs and more were expected to go even before the merger.

The alliance has not solved HBOS's capital problems - instead, it has made Lloyds TSB's position worse. The new bank's 'tier 1' capital ratios - a key measure of its financial strength - will be just 5.9 per cent, short of the 6 per cent level preferred by Lloyds TSB. 'That is a bit below where I would like it to be,' says Chris White, banking specialist at Threadneedle Asset Management. 'I cannot rule out their raising capital in the future, which would dilute some of the gains.'

Lloyds seems to agree: it took the opportunity of Friday's market bounce to place 5 per cent of its shares, raising £767m. And, much to the chagrin of investors who have stuck with its shares for their generous dividend yield, it has said it will rebase its payout to 40 per cent of earnings - last year it paid out more than 60 per cent of its earnings - and will distribute this year's dividend in shares rather than cash.

Nor has it solved the short-term funding problem: while Lloyds got more than 60 per cent of its funding from customers' savings and deposits, HBOS's proportion was just 52 per cent and that means the combined group will still rely on the wholesale markets for about 45 per cent of its financing. The ratio of loans to assets of the group will also be relatively high, at around 160 per cent, reflecting HBOS's more aggressive approach.

'They will have to continue the process of selling assets and deleveraging the HBOS balance sheet,' says White. 

But he is enthusiastic about the deal. 'I take my hat off to Eric. He has transformed the Lloyds TSB business and created a strong institution. This is the opportunity he has been waiting for.'

While, on the face of it, the price it is paying seems cheap - at around £13bn in Lloyds TSB shares, it is only around half the book value of HBOS's assets - White expects that significant write-downs in the value of HBOS's assets will slash that book value. These are likely to be focused on the property and private equity portfolios built up by Peter Cummings and his corporate team through the funding of everything from Wembley Stadium to backing Sir Philip Green.

While Daniels said he was excited about the idea of combining the private equity business with his own Development Capital arm, and was sanguine about the extent of the two banks' £60bn property exposure, analysts expect a dramatic scaling-back of the level of risk in the combined group. 

These kind of exposures were another key reason for the City's nervousness about HBOS shares - and for dissatisfaction with the performance of its chief executive. While the aggressive expansion into high-risk areas like buy-to-let mortgages and leveraged finance began under his predecessor Sir James Crosby, Hornby stands accused of failing to recognise the risks quickly enough and position the bank for the new, more risk-averse, climate. Dubbed the 'wonder kid' when he got the top job in 2006 aged less than 40, he was poached from Asda and has a retailing background. 

'Management has not come out of this well,' says one leading investor. 'It was more vulnerable than its competitors and management must take the blame for that and the fact that they have sold out at what will be deemed to be a very low level.

'Hornby carried on regardless [after succeeding Crosby] when, if he had been concerned about the strategy, he had ample time to do something about it. I would be very surprised if he gets a senior role in the new organisation.'

Daniels refuses to be drawn on the role Hornby or any of the HBOS executives will play in the combined bank - although he insists Hornby will still be around in a year's time. 'I have the highest respect for his skills,' he says.

In turn, Blank describes the deal as a 'landmark day' for the financial services industry. 'It is a unique opportunity to create the largest and best financial services group in Britain,' he says. Once the deal has been bedded down, he holds out the prospect of using the group's financial muscle to expand overseas.

But the immediate challenge is to meld the two parts while steering the group through the worst financial crisis in a century. If it succeeds, it will be - as Daniels claims - a 'wonderful franchise'. But the penalties for failure will be high.

