Investors from China and the Middle East have lost more than £1bn baling out British and American banks - and the losses look set to mount further.

Last year saw a wave of investments in banks by sovereign wealth funds, including the China State Investment Company, the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and the Singapore investors. While the stakes looked cheap at the time, bank shares have continued to plummet, leaving the investors nursing big losses.

Temasek, manager of the assets of the government of Singapore, and the China Development Bank invested £2.5bn for a combined 5.2 per cent stake in Barclays in July 2007. They paid 720p a share, around twice the current Barclays share price and, after adjusting for the impact of this summer's placing, their loss is around £700m. Both these investors, along with the Qatari Investment Authority, invested £2bn in a separate placing at 282p so are showing a profit at Friday's closing price of 366.5p a share. 

One of the first investments by the Chinese State Investment Company was to buy a 10 per cent stake in the private equity giant Blackstone. Its shares have almost halved, leaving the fund with a $400m loss.

Foreign investors in Citigroup and UBS are also likely to be facing big losses although, because they made them in convertible shares, which will be exchanged for ordinary shares at a set price, they cannot yet be quantified. The Government of Singapore Investment Company (GIC) invested 11bn Swiss francs (£5.5bn) in UBS in a deal to be converted into ordinary shares at between 51.48 Swiss francs and 62.92 Swiss francs by 2010. The bank's shares closed on Friday at SwFr21. 

The GIC was also a major investor in Citigroup, stumping up $7bn in preference shares, while the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority paid $7.5bn for convertibles to be exchanged at prices between $32 and $37 between March 2010 and September 2011. Citi's shares are currently around $19.

Overseas investors in Merrill Lynch - including the Korean Investment Authority, Kuwaiti Investment Authority and Temasek - were protected from losses following its acquisition by Bank of America by clauses awarding them compensation if Merrill sold shares at below the price they paid within a year. 

The losses suffered by these funds make last week's investment in Goldman Sachs by Warren Buffett look particularly astute. He is receiving a dividend of 10 per cent on his $5bn preference share investment and warrants to buy a further $5bn shares at $115 - $18 below last Friday's price.
