Robert Talbut, chief investment officer of Royal London Asset Management, would be 'very surprised' if senior banking executives accepted any bonuses this year. Ian Gordon, banking analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, thinks none of the UK domestic banks will pay a cash dividend for at least two years. The odds on Sir Fred Goodwin still being chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland at the end of the year shorten with each percentage fall in the share price - and many other banking executives will also be wondering if their days are also numbered.

But last week's rescue package makes it less likely that any of our remaining banks will follow Bradford & Bingley and Northern Rock into oblivion.

What will be left, however, is a banking industry bearing little resemblance to that of a year ago. While there are questions over how effectively the government can police whatever rules are established on the treatment of small businesses and retail customers, or can realistically limit pay and bonuses of City bankers, the fact that the taxpayer is picking up the £500bn bill for their decade of excess means they will have far more leverage to insist on change.

Goodwin told the City in August he 'did not want to do this job forever' and the betting is that he will get his wish: Cantor Index, the spreadbetting firm, puts him and his chairman, Sir Tim McKillop, at 1/10 favourites to be shown the door by the end of the year, ahead of HBOS's Andy Hornby and Lord Stevenson - and their bank's takeover by Lloyds TSB is not expected to include jobs for them.

One of the bank's leading shareholders said he believed Goodwin could serve a 'useful purpose' over the next few months drawing up details of what RBS will raise from the government's offer of preference shares and will then hand over to a successor.

Stephen Hester, recently appointed as an RBS non-executive, would be a 'credible successor in the short-term as I do not believe there will a good supply of credible banking candidates'. Hester was finance director of Abbey before it was taken over by Santander, but that was four years ago so he is relatively untainted by recent events.

While Barclays chief executive John Varley and Bob Diamond, who heads its BarCap wholesale banking division, are deemed to have ridden out the crisis better than their domestic rivals so far, there are fears that a side-effect of Hank Paulson's $700bn bail-out plan will be to force Barclays to write off far more of its lending book than it has done so far by establishing a price for the toxic debt instruments. Exane's Gordon thinks that will mean £2bn more write-offs; others predict as much as three times that.

Barclays hopes to avoid having to take up the government's offer to subscribe for preference shares and go to existing shareholders to boost its capital ratios by the required 1 percentage point. Investors showed their concern about that prospect on Thursday, when its shares tumbled 31.5p as other banks rose.

The bank has already raised more than £5bn in two share placings and it indicated when it announced the deal to buy the US operations of Lehman Brothers that it intended to raise a further £700m from a group of investors including the Qatar Investment Authority and Temasek. There were rumours - denied by the bank - that the fall in its share price last week was because it tried and failed to carry that out.

The fact that the rumour had such a big impact underlines how fragile confidence has become. This fragility means suggestions can be dismissed that Lloyds TSB's takeover of HBOS could now be abandoned because the government's package will allow HBOS to survive alone. 'If there was a suggestion that Lloyds was reconsidering the acquisition, HBOS would be the next bank to be nationalised,' said one investor.

The Bank of England is offering up to £250bn in guarantees in a bid to open the market for inter-bank lending but, even if it succeeds, that market is unlikely to recover its former size for years, if not decades. Add in the fact that the financial turmoil means a severe recession is now almost inevitable and, say HBOS insiders, there is still overwhelming logic for it and Lloyds TSB to join forces. 

Observers expect that all the banks participating in the government's £25bn capital-raising scheme - expected to be Lloyds TSB, HBOS and Barclays - will announce the details simultaneously and negotiations are already likely to have started. But it is still unclear what the interest rates and other terms of the preference shares will be, such as whether they will be convertible into ordinary shares, their timespans and whether they will have warrants attached. 

The banks are already using the crisis as an excuse to increase their margins. The Federation of Small Businesses point out that Barclays has increased its overdraft rate from 6.8 to 10.8 per cent above bank base rates, meaning its customers are paying 15 per cent on their loans. 

While all the banks rushed to cut their headline rates after last week's base rate cut, they rewrote the terms of products like tracker mortgages or withdrew fixed rates behind the scenes so the net effect was borrowers are paying more.

Stephen Alambritis, head of public affairs at the Federation of Small Businesses, said it was already talking to business minister Shriti Vadera. 'We raised the issue of ensuring that banks do not revert to type by increasing prices as they did during the recession of the 1990s.' He is passing on examples of poor behaviour, such as overdrafts being converted to loans without warning, or facilities being summarily withdrawn.

There have been numerous reviews of small business banking, including a Competition Commission inquiry in 2002, and a code of practice which is supposed to prevent bad behaviour. But, says Alambritis, many of these measures do not work. No one can force banks to make unprofitable lending decisions, and they can easily blame a looming recession, or a falling housing market, for higher prices and lower lending.

There are also signs of buck-passing on plans to restrict pay and bonuses for executives and City traders. While Financial Services Authority chief executive Hector Sants said in May that banks' regulatory capital requirements should reflect the riskiness of their bonus schemes, nothing formal has been issued yet - nor, it seems, is anything expected.

There are discussions on the issue at the Financial Stability Forum, made up of international regulators. And the FSA said it had started a programme of visits to firms looking at their remuneration policies which may lead to a 'Dear CEO' letter, outlining good practices. 

But the Centre for Economics and Business Research still predicts that bonuses this year will total £3.6bn. While that is 60 per cent lower than last year, banks share prices are down as much as 90 per cent - and some have gone bust or had to be rescued - and profits have disappeared under a wave of write-downs.

Bill Schuh, who runs the European operations of Callidus Software, which provides performance management systems, thinks businesses should implement deferred bonus schemes, paid over a period of years. Provided these are transparent, he said, they should be acceptable to employees and should not hinder movement between firms.

Some in the City are already thinking along these lines: Michael Geoghegan, chief executive of HSBC, has said the City must find ways of making its remuneration practices more long-term. Some have suggested that the best way to encourage greater responsibility would be to ensure that senior executives' pay was based on risk, but Talbut doubts this is feasible: 'I'm not sure we could get access to the information we would need to monitor risk on an ongoing basis.'

No one, from regulators to bank bosses to governments, had that information. Making the risks of any banking business clearer is key to re-establishing functioning markets.
