The Financial Services Authority chairman, Lord Turner, used to be a management consultant, and it shows. In presenting his eponymous report on the banking crisis, he is full of persuasive arguments about his recommendations, backed up with detailed references and skilled demolition of protests from his critics. 

But, just as a management consultant must sell his solutions to his clients, Turner has the challenge of selling his proposals to banks and, more importantly, to regulators across the world. While he demurs at suggestions that he is attempting to set the agenda for them, there is little doubt that the FSA is keen to re-establish its reputation as one of the leading financial watchdogs.

That reputation has been severely battered. British banks have been more severely affected than those of any other country in the financial crisis - barring, perhaps, the US's - and our regulatory system has been found most wanting. The FSA itself has acknowledged that it failed adequately to question what banks were getting up to, provided they were satisfied they had adequate risk controls in place - which, with hindsight, virtually no global bank actually had.

Rehabilitation of the banking industry is vital. Before the current slump, financial services as a whole accounted for 14% of our gross domestic product and one job in every 30. While Turner points out that the boom that preceded the financial crash had "swollen some parts of the financial sector beyond their economically efficient size", it is crucial to the British economy that London remains a significant financial centre.

He thinks it has a pretty good chance of doing so, pointing out that large parts of the City - equity broking, the Lloyd's insurance market, and foreign-exchange trading, for instance - are relatively unaffected. "The bits that got swollen were to do with the complex versions of securitised credit, the CDOs and CDOs-squared. The debt-trading rooms of the big banks grew to a size which was unnecessary and they will shrink.

"In the long-term, that is a good thing but it means that in the cities which were doing this kind of trading, primarily London and New York, a significant number of high-paid jobs won't exist in the future. But we may already be quite a long way through that shake-out."

He also wonders whether the kind of banks that employed those traders will exist in the future. His report has been criticised for claiming it was not "feasible" to separate the "casino" banks from the "utility" banks - those that offer banking services to business and retail customers. Turner says critics misunderstand the premise of his report: he points out that the wording of the report actually says: "New capital and liquidity requirements should be designed to constrain commercial banks' role in risky proprietary trading activities. A more formal and complete legal distinction of 'narrow banking' from market-making activities is not feasible."

That, he says, reflects the fact that banks do more than just offer us mortgages and current accounts: big global businesses need complex global services, which may include interest-rate swaps and foreign exchange trading.

The difference, he says, is that these will be done for clients, rather than on the bank's own account. "We need to find some way of preventing commercial banks taking the benefits of protection from the [Bank of England] and using that to fund risky proprietary trading."

The way he proposes to enforce that is to insist that anything that smacks of proprietary trading would have to be backed by significant amounts of capital - as much as three times current requirements. 

"We may still need the power to say to large banks 'you can't do that', or to insist that they put 100% capital behind [riskier business]. The net effect could be that an increasing number of banks pursue strategies which are focused on classic commercial activities." 

That focus on the liquidity and capital of these activities is a complete volte-face from the recent history of regulation. Turner points out that all the negotiations on "Basel II", the latest revision of European banking regulations, did not even question whether the arrangements for trading activities were adequate; the focus was all on the traditional banking business. 

Yet, says the report, had regulations required more capital to be retained against riskier trading activities, or the build-up of a buffer of extra capital reserves during boom periods, "the world would not have suffered an economic setback anything like as severe as the one it now faces. Lending growth would have been constrained by the need to build up capital buffers, which would have been available to absorb losses at the onset of the economic downturn."

Hedge funds, seen by many observers as key contributors to the near-collapse of the global financial system, merit just 29 mentions in the 122-page report. Turner says that while they have a "totemic" reputation as the villains of the crisis, "the simple fact is that, if you said they would be subject to the same capital requirements as banks, most would actually be able to increase their leverage by five times what they have now. They do borrow, but they are not that highly leveraged."

However, he adds: "They are not that systemically important individually, but collectively they do have a key role. Their deleveraging [reduction in borrowings] last year drove the depression in equities and bond markets. Even if they are not regulated, we need to understand more about them."

That, he says, means gathering information globally and if there is a systemic risk, having the power to extend direct regulation to them.

While Turner denies that the FSA plans to move away from its old-style "principles-based" regulation, there is little doubt that it is already being far more interventionist. The business plan published in February envisaged a 36.5% rise in its annual funding requirement, including a 24% rise in the costs of staff. Turner says it has been actively recruiting, and has already taken on an extra 280 people with particular skills in liquidity and accounting.

Among the new tasks the FSA is adding to its list are more detailed monitoring of, and dialogue with, bank auditors and closer analysis of banks' accounts. 

"In support of the Treasury's asset protection scheme, we have been doing intense and detailed analysis of balance sheets of banks at a level we have not previously done. We have realised that needs to be done in future.

"We have become more aware that some assets can be treated significantly differently in the books of different banks. Our role will be to say to auditors: 'This is the range of treatments, you are the outlier; justify to us why that is'."

One thing in the FSA's favour is that, although the financial crisis has had a severe impact on the entire economy, it has not uncovered scandals along the lines of the Madoff pyramid scheme. Touching wood and crossing his fingers, Turner says he believes that is because, while hedge funds are not regulated, the managers are monitored. That, he says, means the UK has a "tighter grip" on them than the US. "But I say that with some trepidation," he warns.

