The future of Bradford & Bingley is on a knife-edge this weekend, as frantic efforts are made to rescue the buy-to-let lender and prevent it from becoming the next victim of the credit crunch.

The Treasury and the City watchdog, the Financial Services Authority, are seeking a 'white knight' to stave off the possibility that the government will be forced to nationalise the bank in the same way that Northern Rock was put into public ownership in February. A well-placed source said that 'the priority, as with the Rock, will be to protect depositors'.

But there is now a consensus that B&B's days as an independent financial institution are coming to an end, with analysts saying that either a sale, possibly to a 'lifeboat' consortium of rival high street banks, or nationalisation, is the most likely outcome. A break-up sale is also a possibility, as is a combination with Northern Rock.

Although the bank says it is well capitalised, the company is badly exposed to the sickly buy-to-let market and analysts say it may struggle to survive in the current global financial crisis. It was perceived to be 'clearing the decks' ahead of a sale last week when it announced it was shedding 370 jobs, writing off £134m of toxic assets and paying £13m to rewrite the contract under which it had to take on buy-to-let mortgages from rival GMAC. But its share price continued to plunge, closing on Friday at 20p.

Its five high-street banking rivals own 30 per cent of its shares, after they were forced to step in to underwrite its £400m rights issue, and it is believed that the FSA has already canvassed the support of HSBC, Barclays and Santander - which owns Abbey National and has just taken over Alliance & Leicester - to support B&B. While none of the three is likely to be keen to take on B&B on its own, they may be prepared to take on parts of the bank under a break-up deal.

B&B has been under pressure since it launched the rights issue, just weeks after denying that it needed one. Since then, it has revealed mounting bad debts on its portfolio of buy-to-let mortgages - it is the second largest lender in this market - a slump in new lending and a series of asset write-offs. Last Thursday it said that it was removing mortgage advisers from all its branches so that all new inquiries would have to be dealt with at a central processing unit in Bingley.

But the bank denied that meant it was effectively closed to new lending - only a tenth of its mortgages traditionally come from its branches, the remainder through intermediaries. It said that its branches would now concentrate on raising retail deposits. 

Bradford & Bingley was formed in 1964 as a result of the merger of the Bradford Equitable building society and the Bingley Permanent building society. In 2000, it demutualised and floated on the London Stock Exchange with former members receiving shares of up to £5,000 each.

Many former building societies that abandoned mutual status have fared badly in the crunch: Santander took over Alliance & Leicester, HBOS was forced into a merger with Lloyds TSB, and Northern Rock went bust.
