Swiss banking giant UBS has total assets more than four times the size of the Swiss economy and its fellow bank, Credit Suisse, is more than twice as large as the country's gross domestic product. Our own Royal Bank of Scotland is almost one-and-a-half times as big as Britain's GDP, and the Dutch ING is more than twice the size that of the Netherlands'. Small wonder, then, that there is growing concern that such banks are not so much too big to fail as too large to rescue.

Government coffers are already being depleted: our government has just put up £18bn to cover the deposits of Bradford & Bingley, even though much of this will be picked up by banks through the compensation scheme, on top of the £100bn-odd cost of the Northern Rock nationalisation.

The German government could be liable for up to €26bn (£21bn) through guaranteeing the liabilities of HypoVereinsbank. It took three countries - Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands - to stump up €11bn to bail out Fortis, while the first two of these teamed up with France to invest €6.4bn in Dexia.

Iceland has injected €600m into Glitnir. Capping it all, the Irish government has landed itself with a potential €400bn bill by underwriting the deposits of all its banks. Combined, these actions add up to more than the US's controversial $700bn (£400bn) Troubled Asset Relief Programme. 

There are now growing concerns over how national governments could cope if some of the European banking giants collapsed. Daniel Gros, director of the Centre for European Policy Studies, says: 'If nothing is done in the short term, it could become a serious banking crisis throughout Europe.' 

He is concerned that authorities still do not appreciate the seriousness of the issue. 'Everyone says our banks are fine - it's the others that are in trouble and we do not want to pay for them. Then, when they discover their banks do actually have problems, they do a U-turn. But by then it is too late.'

The rescue of US giants like Wachovia, Washington Mutual and Freddie Mac means that collapses on the scale of UBS, Deutsche or RBS are no longer unthinkable because these behemoths also have some of the biggest leverage - the bankers' term for borrowings - and exposure to toxic assets.

UBS may have prided itself on its reputation for discreet money management for the world's super-rich, but it has also emerged as the European bank most exposed to US sub-prime mortgages. Already this year it has written down a staggering $44.2bn of assets (or almost twice its net profit of the three previous years), purged its senior management, shed 4,000 staff and become embroiled in a potentially devastating US tax-evasion investigation. 

It is expected that UBS will see a multi-billion-dollar injection of capital thanks to a tax rebate, having posted losses over the past year. And chairman Peter Kurer told last week's extraordinary general meeting that it expected to make a small profit in its third quarter, and that 2009 would be a 'profitable year'. 'UBS [has] developed a remediation plan to address the lessons learned from the credit crisis. Substantial progress has been made in the meantime,' he said. 'Personnel changes have been made in key positions; how UBS determines and allocates risk capacity is being adjusted; the risk function has been reconfigured; and significant refinements have been made to the way the bank measures and evaluates risk.'

That has done little to reassure detractors. Kurer said nothing about further write-offs, which many expect will be revealed when UBS announces third-quarter figures next month, nor did he give any indication of the impact of the US inquiry. The bank is fighting to protect the $200m fee income it receives from its $200bn wealth management division but, in recent months, a significant number of its wealthy clients have left the bank, taking fright over the wide-ranging US investigation into UBS's alleged role in tax evasion.

'It doesn't add up,' says one seasoned banking insider.

'The problem is Switzerland is a relatively small country,' says a City source. 'To support UBS and Credit Suisse is going to be very expensive. They're in intensive care.'

They could well meet Royal Bank of Scotland in the hospital. While the bank insisted this week that the rescue of Fortis - one of its partners in last year's acquisition of ABN Amro - would have no impact on its finances, nor its plans for integrating the corporate banking activities it is retaining, investors remain suspicious. Its 'funding gap' - the difference between the amount it lends and the amount it takes from customers in deposits, a difference which must be made up in the wholesale markets - is second only to HBOS at £160bn, according to analysis by Citigroup. If you add in the fact that its Citizens Bank business in the US is exposed to the dismal consumer market, that its UK retail business is expected to slow - and bad debts are likely to rise sharply - as recession takes hold, and that the ABN deal has left it with a weak balance sheet, then it is unsurprising that the speculators have picked on RBS as the likely next credit-crunch victim.

On the other hand, its Ulster Bank subsidiary has been included in the Irish government's protection for depositors, which means it is benefiting from some of the rush into the country's banks as savers take advantage of the guarantees. But while it may also be able to take advantage of the US's Tarp proposals, it may prefer not to use the scheme, as it would be required to give up a stake in Citizens to the government and might be forced to limit the rather generous pay packets of its US executives.

The government stepped in to save Bradford & Bingley, but RBS would be a far bigger challenge - its £29bn market value compares with just £300m for B&B and its business is much larger and more complex. That means the government would probably have to broker a rescue. If one were needed, the number of banks able to finance such a deal are limited. While HSBC, the world's biggest bank and one of the least exposed to the credit crunch, usually tops the list, it has little interest in expanding its business here, preferring to look for opportunities in Asia and other emerging economies. 

Santander is the other favourite. That is partly because the two have a long-standing relationship, and partly because it is one of the strongest banks in Europe, courtesy of the Spanish government's determination to discourage high leverage and risky lending. 

But there must be a question mark over whether it could - or should - take on more of the British banking industry, having just added Alliance & Leicester and B&B's savings business to its existing Abbey network.

Even the once-mighty Deutsche Bank is seen as vulnerable to a change in sentiment. Its leverage is among the highest in Europe, at more than 50 times, and its liabilities, at around €2 trillion, are higher than those of Fannie Mae, the US mortgage giant that collapsed last month. Simon Maughan, banking analyst at MF Securities, says Deutsche has 'come late to the deleveraging game. It insisted that its model was an originate-and-distribute game and that it did not buy [loans and other financial instruments] back like everyone else, [but] the massive expansion in its balance sheet in recent years says that is rubbish.' He points out that its new finance director now promises to look at how it can deleverage the balance sheet. While he thinks there is unlikely to be a run on its deposits, or panic in Germany about its survival, 'there are still a lot of issues for it to work through'.

On the plus side is the argument put by Ben May, European economist at Capital Economics, that simply looking at the size of these banks' balance sheets is too simplistic. 'You do not expect that, when a bank goes bust, the value of its assets are just wiped out. It could be that the value of the assets is inflated and some can't be sold, but a lot of the assets are clearly good and you could sell them.'

But there is little doubt that Ireland's move to guarantee all deposits - thought to be designed to prevent Anglo Irish Bank, one of the weakest, from collapsing - has prompted banks and regulators to look at ways to underpin the financial system.

While Germany quickly vetoed France's plan to raise a fund to support the sector, European banks are pressing their governments for action to re-open the wholesale markets, through measures such as underwriting securitisations - the repackaging and selling on of mortgages - or by following the Irish and guaranteeing all deposits. Alistair Milne, banking expert at Cass Business School, suggests following one of the proposals in the US's Tarp plan: underwriting most of the bank's debts to limit their losses to, say, 5 per cent. 'If that is the maximum they can lose, they will trade at 95 cents in the dollar, not 70. That would put $300bn back on banks' balance sheets,' he says.

At the moment, however, the Europeans appear content to wait until Hank Paulson's Tarp plan is approved in the hope that it will also stabilise the European banking sector. If it does not, there could be many more sleepless nights for European regulators.
