Former Liverpool football star Robbie Fowler once said he has forgotten how many buy-to-let properties he owns; many in the new generation of landlords may well wish they could share his amnesia. While Fowler has amassed an estimated £30m-plus fortune from his activities, more recent entrants to the market are more likely to be watching the value of their investments slide and facing a big hike in their interest bill as they struggle to replace their old fixed-rate deals.

The big question is: will those landlords will start dumping their properties on the market, fuelling the downward spiral in the housing market as a whole? Or will the prospect of a rise in rents, as falling property values and the credit crunch mean a growing number of would-be housebuyers turn to the rental market instead, encourages landlords to stick with it?

Confusingly, there is plenty of evidence to support both arguments. Buy-to-let statistics for the first half of 2008, to be released by the Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) on Tuesday, are expected to confirm that buy-to-let transactions - or at least those financed by mortgages - have fallen even more dramatically than the 50 per cent slump in the mortgage market as a whole. And insurance company Skandia predicted that as much as £77bn of buy-to-let mortgages (or more than 60 per cent of the £126bn outstanding at the end of March) could be redeemed as the market returns from the recent boom, which has seen a 60-fold rise in the number of buy-to-let mortgages in just a decade, to a more normal level of activity. That is at least partially supported by a recent warning by financial advisers Hargreaves Lansdown that as many as 200,000 of the 350,000 or so buy-to-let mortgages taken out last year are already suffering from negative equity - properties worth less than their mortgage value - and 10,000 have already run up arrears on their loans.

But rental surveys are also showing at least tentative signs of a rise in demand from tenants which, according to property experts, should eventually feed through to higher rents. 

The more optimistic believe that the housing crash could actually encourage new types of investors into the rental market by increasing yields to levels high enough to make them attractive as an income investment, rather than - as has been the case in the past decade - relying on ever-rising prices to provide profits.

The latest letting survey from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) certainly showed booming demand from tenants: 37 per cent of its surveyor members reported a rise in demand in the three months to July, up from 30 per cent in the previous three months. But supply is also rising - the number of landlords putting properties up for rent was at the highest level since the RICS survey began a decade ago. That is partly due to a rise in the number of 'frustrated sellers' opting to rent out their properties rather than wait for an elusive buyer or accept a knock-down price.

This source of supply is likely to continue to rise if, as most predict, the housing market continues to fall. But there is also likely to be a wave of rental properties coming on to the market from developers unable to find buyers for their speculative builds - something that is already hitting rents in areas such as London's Docklands and city centres such as Birmingham and Manchester, where there is a glut of converted warehouses and designer apartments.

Jon Neale, a research associate with Knight Frank, thinks these forced landlords will continue to weigh on the market at least until the end of this year, limiting the scope for rent rises. He points out that, even after the recent falls in prices and some rent rises, gross yield on property was just 4.07 per cent which, while up on the first quarter, still looks unattractive compared with the 7 per cent available on some building society bonds, even without the risk that prices could still fall by 20 per cent - or more.

Yolande Barnes, head of residential research at Savills, expects yields will eventually reach 7 per cent: 'Some have reached that stage already, but a rational investor will think "If I can get this cheaper next year, why buy now?".'

She warns that a rise in repossessions could bring a further increase in rental properties: she thinks banks and building societies are already planning to rent out some of their repossessed properties, rather than dumping them at auction as they did during the 1980s slump. While forecasts for repossessions are still relatively modest, that would put further pressure on rents. 

So far, according to John Heron, managing director of Paragon, a leading buy-to-let specialist, there is no sign of investors rushing for the exit. He thinks even buy-to-let investors are 'rational beings. They will weigh up what they will get by selling now versus the prospect of strong demand from tenants and some upward pressure on rents' and decide not to bail out.

Some may have little option, however. CML statistics for the first quarter of 2008 showed a large rise in the number of mortgages three months in arrears to 0.9 per cent of loans, compared with 0.73 per cent in the last quarter of 2007, and next week's figures are expected to show a further increase. Borrowers who signed up for two-year fixed deals in 2006 - as the majority of buy-to-let borrowers did - will find themselves having to pay far more for their new loans. Rates for these mortgages have risen at least as fast as for conventional loans, while the number of offers available has plunged.

Moneyfacts statistics show that the number of buy-to let products available has fallen to just under 600, compared with more than 3,600 a year ago. And criteria are becoming far tighter: not only will few lenders consider advancing more than 75 per cent of the purchase price, they are asking for more assurance that rents will cover mortgage interest payments, asking for them to be perhaps 1.4 times interest payments, rather than 1.2 times.

Fionnuala Earley, chief economist at Nationwide, says its research indicates this may not be too much of a problem: 'A typical purchaser in 2006, even with the payments shock [of higher mortgage rates] will still have good enough rental cover because of the rise in rents. If there are strong rises in rents to come, why would they sell out?'

But that depends on borrowers' individual circumstances, and there are likely to be far more stretched individuals than there are Robbie Fowlers. Ray Boulger of broker John Charcol says that, while professional landlords are estimated to own around three-quarters of the rental stock, more than half of all investors have fewer than three properties in their portfolios. These kind of amateurs may be far less able, never mind willing, to sit out a market slump than the professionals.

Paragon says that investors in the kind of overpriced city-centre apartments which are now virtually unlettable and unsellable should not be classed as buy-to-let investors: 'These properties were targeted by speculative purchasers who thought they could make a quick buck by flipping them. That is not the buy-to-let market. Buy-to-let investors do not own a property unless they can demonstrate that there is tenant demand.' 

The buy-to-let phenomenon has grown so rapidly that no one yet knows just how much of its dramatic growth has been fuelled by the former type of investors, rather than the latter, or how it will react to a downturn. While buy-to-let experts hope it will be more stable than the housing market as a whole, there is a risk that it will prove the opposite.
