One of Britain's top fund managers believes stockmarkets in Britain and the US have bottomed out - but it will be at least three years before it is worth investing in the shares of UK banks again.

Neil Woodford, head of investment at Invesco Perpetual and one of the few fund managers to have avoided the sector completely in the run-up to the crisis, thinks the stockmarket has hit a nadir, both here and in the US, but some sectors still look very vulnerable - including the banks. He predicts there will be further bad debts on their lending books and the need for more capital injections.

"I think they're really uninvestable from an equity point of view at the moment," he said. "In time, maybe, post nationalisation, when they come back cleaned up, they'll look very attractive businesses, because banks ought to make good returns in a benign economic environment and are good places to invest." But he would be "surprised" if that happened in the next three years.

Woodford has gained a reputation as one of our most astute investors. His Equity Income and High Income funds have fallen 17% over the year to February. But that was considerably ahead of the 33% fall in the market, and 27% drop in similar funds, over the same period. 

Over five years, his funds have gained 40%, despite a drop in the stockmarket over the period - almost 40 times the return of the average fund in his sector.

He warns this is "not like any sort of recession that we've seen in recent, modern economic history" and does not expect "green shoots" of recovery for some time. "We've had over a decade and a half of very benign economic conditions; debt has built up significantly in the economy and in the banking system," he said at an investment conference. 

"My view is that the process of rebalancing the world economy and the domestic economy will take many years... We could be in a weak economic environment really for a prolonged period of time and I'm thinking three to four years at least."

Woodford also predicts that house prices could fall a further 20% before they bottom and that the crash will leave home owners with a completely different relationship to their homes.

"I think house prices will get cheap in the same price way that they were over-valued earlier in the cycle [and] will then stabilise for a long period of time. [They] will probably not grow in real terms for a long period." 

Woodford says he lies awake at night worrying about the value of the pound and expects sterling to fall further. 

"This is a very challenging environment, it will find out a lot of businesses and money will be lost in many investments. Recovery will come; it's some way off, but I think when it comes, the fundamentals of the UK economy will be far more robust and more sustainable than it's been in recent years."
