Bob Diamond, president of Barclays, and John Varley, its chief executive, were struggling not to appear too jubilant as they discussed the bank's acquisition of Lehman Brothers' US investment banking and capital markets business. 

It certainly looks like a dream deal: little over a week ago, they were in talks about taking on the whole bank as a way of gaining access to just these assets and, while these talks did not get as far as setting a price, it is odds on that it would have been substantially more than the $250m (£137m) it is paying now - plus $1.5bn for its New York office and data centres (reckoned to be close to market value). Offloading the bits of Lehman - including $80bn-odd toxic loans - Barclays did not want would have been difficult and time-consuming in the best of markets; in the current frenzied atmosphere, it looked like a risk too far.

Buying the assets from the liquidators meant Barclays could pick only those bits it wanted and can get on with integrating the business rapidly, subject to the US courts giving the go-ahead, reducing the risk of its 10,000 employees defecting to rivals. Indeed, Diamond spent most of last week interviewing staff and devising an integration plan.

In one fell swoop, it achieves most of the group's ambitions in the US, catapulting it into the top three of capital-markets businesses globally and adding Lehman's skills in equity capital markets and credit trading to Barclays Capital's own foreign exchange and interest rates businesses. While Lehman's demise was ultimately caused by its exposure to the crumbling US housing market, just 5 per cent of the assets Barclays is acquiring relate to mortgages and, Diamond says 'the vast majority' of these are high quality and easily traded.

And Varley sounded uncharacteristically gleeful when he promised that the deal would bring an immediate improvement to profits, would boost earnings this year, improve its capital ratios and have a 'very high' return on investment.

Barclays does seem to be getting a lot of revenue for its $250m: based on Lehman's third-quarter earnings results, excluding the swingeing write-offs on its toxic loans, Varley said the business could be taking in around $5bn a year and, while the overlap in the two businesses' corporate-bond businesses meant some of that would fall away, it would still be a big boost to BarCap's revenues.

That is, however, assuming the business is still there - last week's traumas in the financial markets prompted many obituaries of the current model of investment banking and no one can predict what shape the equities, derivatives or bond markets will be in this time next month, never mind next year. 

Varley shrugged off such criticism, pointing out that investment banking revenues have been growing twice as fast as the economy as a whole and that the industry was now consolidating rapidly.

But Tom Rayner, banking analyst at Citigroup, says: 'Whether this acquisition makes sense strategically will largely depend on conditions in financial markets, in our view. If markets return to normal within a relatively short space of time, and structural growth in investment banking resumes, then it is likely to prove successful. However, with significant uncertainty hanging over the industry, we believe this may turn out to have been a risk not worth taking.'

But if Varley and Diamond are right, Barclays could emerge as one of the few winners of the credit crunch.
