Bank shares enjoyed a 15 per cent bounce last week but holders of their bonds were not so lucky. Prices of the riskiest bank bonds have continued to plunge as investors prepare for a wave of new bank issues or, at worst, defaults by the more fragile players.

The interest rate on the lowest grade, or tier one, bank debt widened to record levels late last week against the rate at which banks lend to each other.

Banks now have to pay as much as 1.5 per cent above Libor (the London Interbank Offered Rate). Before the credit crunch, the differential was as low as 0.1 per cent. 

Ben Lord, a member of the bond team at M&G, said in a blog last week: 

'There is growing concern in the market about banks' ability and willingness to repay investors.' 

He points out that the prolonged credit crunch means banks are likely to have to raise more capital.

So far, banks worldwide have raised just 70 per cent of the $1 trillion that has been written off against toxic loans and other bad debts.

Shareholders, who have supplied the bulk of that, are increasingly reluctant to provide more funds. 

'Banks therefore look set to issue even more in the way of tier one paper, and the huge supply that seems set to come to market is causing prices to fall further,' wrote Lord. 

The situation could worsen as regulators withdraw the support mechanisms that were introduced at the height of the financial crisis.

Robert Talbut, the chief investment officer at Royal London Asset Management, points out that the Bank of England has confirmed it will withdraw its special liquidity scheme at the end of October, despite hopes that the scheme would have been renewed.

The European Central Bank is also considering tightening the collateral which it will permit under its scheme, given concern about the amount and quality of lending it is having to accept. 

While the rescue of Northern Rock and Bear Sterns in the US - where no losses were suffered by bondholders - had persuaded investors that these loans were ultra safe, the scale of the credit crunch means that view is history.

Jim Leavis, the head of retail and institutional fixed income at M&G, points out that the riskiest tier one bonds will often include provisions allowing defaults on interest payments if the equity dividend is passed - something a growing number of banks are doing.

That will be tested next month when interest on £200m Northern Rock tier one bonds is due to be paid. City investors fear the government will opt to scrap that payment, although neither it nor Northern Rock will comment.
