Gary Hoffman and Richard Pym will need steady nerves to cope with their new appointments. Hoffman takes over as chief executive of Northern Rock - which suffered the ignominy of a government rescue - on 1 October, while Pym has shipped up as chief executive of Bradford & Bingley, whose travails include three stabs at raising money through a rights issue and a bail-out by its banking rivals.

Both also share one aim: to tart their banks up ready for a sale. Pym, a former chief executive of Alliance & Leicester, says his focus is 'very much on building the business' and insists that its portfolio of buy-to-let mortgages is 'very solid'. He is promising to outline his strategy when the bank produces a trading update in October. 

But next week's half-year results are expected to underline the challenge even of stabilising the business, let alone rebuilding it. Bad debts are likely to have continued to mount - analysts are pencilling in £100m of provisions for the full year - while efforts to free up money for new lending by persuading borrowers coming up to the end of their fixed-rate deals to go elsewhere will have had only limited success. Pym has said one of his priorities will be to review the bank's agreement with US finance group GMAC, under which it has to take on £350m of buy-to-let mortgages each quarter - mortgages which are turning sour.

'Clearly the challenge for B&B is restoring credibility of leadership,' says Ian Gordon, banking analyst at Exane BNP Paribas. Pym avoided higher-risk areas such as buy-to-let while at A&L, but Gordon believes he will have to continue B&B's strategy of focusing on niches such as buy-to-let and self-certification mortgages, where buyers do not have to provide evidence of earnings, rather than trying to compete for conventional loans. 

On the bare numbers, there should be a queue of buyers for B&B: its book value is more than twice its share price, which remains stubbornly around 50p. There are also still plenty of willing sellers of the shares: the dismal take-up of its rights issue means that rival banks such as Barclays and HSBC, who were corralled in to underwrite the deal, will end up with around 4 per cent stakes which they are likely to be keen to offload.

But competitors are preoccupied with putting their own houses in order, while financial buyers will want to see how the housing and buy-to-let markets settle before plunging in. Pym has secured a two-year pay deal worth £3m in guaranteed bonuses and options, but the betting is that the bank will no longer be independent when that ends.

Hoffman's immediate challenge is to repay the remaining £17.5bn government loan. Meanwhile, he will concentrate on shrinking the business. The plan drawn up by Ron Sandler, who will shift from executive to non-executive chairman when Hoffman arrives, envisaged the bank taking 2.5 per cent of the mortgage market, a dramatic fall from the 25 per cent it was lending in the first half of 2007, half of which would be funded by retail deposits.

By the end of June, its mortgage portfolio was £77bn compared with £90bn at the end of 2007. But it has proved far easier to ditch the good borrowers than the bad: its arrears and repossessions jumped four-fold in the first half of the year and it could end up with a rump of poor-quality loans no buyer will be interested in. And Hoffman's efforts to attract retail deposits will have to abide by the strict anti-competitive rules drawn up when it was nationalised, which limit its ability to top the best-buy tables.

The government swapped £3bn of Northern Rock's debt for shares, which implies that any buyer would have to pay at least that sum to avoid the taxpayer suffering yet more losses on the nationalisation process. 

Like Pym, Hoffman is to be well rewarded: his base salary will be £700,000 and he also gets three annual payments of £400,000 to compensate for the bonus scheme he is leaving at former employer Barclays. If he succeeds in boosting the Rock's value above that £3bn, he will have earned it.
