In the first quarter of 2000, investors poured almost £6bn into unit trusts and open-ended investment companies, much of it aimed for technology funds. Over the next three years, the market all but halved, and in the first quarter of 2003, net retail sales were a little over £1bn. Then, over the next three years, the market nearly doubled again.

Shares may, as experts claim, be the best bet for the long term, but timing is crucial. While those who invested in 2003 should still be showing profits - because, even after the past year's turbulence, the FTSE 100 is more than 50 per cent above its nadir - the millions who piled in at the market's peak in 2000 will show a loss after eight-and-a-half years, which is fairly long-term by any definition. 

Technology funds have done worst of all: of the seven that exist - many were closed or merged after crippling losses - the average decline between the start of 2000 and the end of June 2008 was 62.8 per cent; the worst, Axa Framlington's Global Technology fund, has turned a £100 investment into £22, according to statistics from Lipper. But even the flagship UK All Companies sector managed only a pedestrian 13.62 per cent return over the period, while UK Equity Income, one of the most popular sectors with private investors, averaged just 29 per cent growth over the period - roughly the same as a building society account paying 5 per cent a year. 

Much depends on the choice of manager. The best UK All Companies fund over the period was Saracen Growth Alpha, which rose by almost 180 per cent, while the worst, Manek Growth, fell 36 per cent. It is no coincidence that four of the top five fund managers have had the same manager for virtually all that period. Jim Fisher has managed Saracen Growth since February 2000; Fidelity Special Situations, which came second, was run by Anthony Bolton from its launch in 1979 until last year; Andrew Green has been running GAM UK Diversified since it launched in 1990, while Andy Brough has been running the Schroders UK Mid-Cap fund since 1999. While Manek Growth has had the same manager since its launch, to great fanfare, in 1997, many of the other bottom-ranking funds have had frequent changes.

Far too few managers have experience of running money in a range of economic climates. Official statistics show that around 80 per cent of the top managers of the top 50 funds have changed in the past three years and, while it is relatively easy to shine when markets are rising, it takes more skill to perform well during both bull and bear markets. Many young turks, such as James Ridgewell at New Star, were being promoted as the next Bolton during the bull market only to falter when conditions became tough.

Given the poor performance of many funds recently - the average UK fund is down 11.5 per cent over the past year - it is unsurprising that investors are looking for alternatives. Commodities and emerging-markets funds have been among the best performers since the market peaked in 2000; the average emerging market fund has risen by 110 per cent over the period. And, according to commodities specialist ETF Securities, commodities beat equities by 40 per cent over the first six months of the year.

That has led to a rash of launches of commodity funds and similar products in recent months. But Justin Urquhart Stewart of Seven Investment Management cautions this could be yet another bubble. He points out that resources stocks now account for more than a third of the FTSE 100 index, a similar proportion to that occupied by technology, media and telecoms shares at the start of 2000. Most of those companies quickly left the index, and some, like Bookham Technology and Baltimore, headed straight for the FTSE 100.

Fund managers are rushing to launch so-called absolute return funds, which are supposed to make money whatever the market conditions. While Blackrock's UK Absolute Alpha has achieved that - up 16.4 per cent over the past year - it has proved hard for others to emulate.

Nicola Horlick, chief executive of Bramdean Asset Management, says: 'A lot of funds say they are absolute return but they are not. They have huge equity positions, which is not what I regard as absolute returns.' She believes stock markets could remain depressed for up to three years. She is looking to more esoteric assets - such as agricultural land in South America or US life insurance policies - which have no correlation to stock markets. 

Contrarians may like to note that net sales of retail unit trusts have been less than £200m for the past two months, their lowest level for 16 years. If 2003 is anything to go by, that could be a raging buy signal for equities and a sell signal for commodities.
