John Tiner once had a reputation for being the luckiest man in the City. Without a university degree, he worked his way up to the top of accountant Arthur Andersen - and left nine months before it collapsed under the weight of fraud and false accounting at its client Enron.

He ticked the wrong age box on a private medical insurance form, and got a prostate cancer test normally reserved for the over-50s. As a result, he was diagnosed early enough to be successfully treated. He left his next job, as chief executive of the Financial Services Authority, in July 2007 with praise ringing in his ears. Then he was lucky enough to secure two jobs in the private sector that could supply what the public sector lacked: significant earning potential. 

Now, however, his luck seems to have run out. Those companies are both in serious difficulties, and praise for his work at the FSA has evaporated. A stinging report on the regulator's stewardship over Northern Rock, the collapse of much of the UK's banking industry and attacks on the rigour of the regulator - including some from his successors at the FSA - have wiped it out.

His latest, and potentially most serious, problem is at Resolution Life, the business established by the colourful entrepreneur Clive Cowdery. It was designed to snap up bargains among financial services businesses laid low by the credit crunch. Tiner agreed to become chief executive last year, when Cowdery established it, after the acquisition of a former business under the same name by Pearl Assurance.

Last week, the bargain-hunting plans were in jeopardy as Tiner's former employer, the FSA, announced that it was investigating "certain actions" by Cowdery and three fellow directors between October 2007 and May 2008, when the Pearl takeover battle was in full swing. While Tiner was not on the board at the time and is not part of the investigation, it does raise questions over his judgment in joining a company without apparently conducting his own due diligence into its background and prospects.

Similar questions surfaced at New Star, where he took up his first private sector job as a non-executive last April. Just months later, the company was plunged into financial turmoil as a period of dismal performance by some of its key fund managers led to a big outflow of funds by investors. That undermined its profits just as it was entering talks with its bankers about refinancing its debts. These failed and the company was forced to sell itself at a knock-down price to rival Henderson.

Again, Tiner was not there when New Star founder John Duffield paid the £364m special dividend to its - mainly employee - shareholders that left it overstretched. But when he joined the board, there were questions over his judgment in linking up with Duffield, who has a reputation as an idiosyncratic, rather authoritarian, manager. Indeed, Tiner's appointment was one of the moves to persuade investors he had heavyweight independent directors on his board.

More seriously, Duffield was one of the key players in the split capital investment trust settlement, an episode which, at least until the credit crisis exploded, was one of the few blots on Tiner's record at the FSA. While he started off being fiercely critical of the fund managers accused of colluding to mislead investors about the nature of these complicated instruments, he agreed to paltry settlement with the firms and let most of those involved escape without penalty.

No one is saying publicly what the Resolution inquiry is about, though the FSA may be examining sales of shares by some directors in the run-up to the sale to Pearl. In December 2007, for example, Cowdery sold 17.7m shares, for £703m, while fellow director Brendan Meehan sold 740,000, raising more than £5m.

The FSA has been conducting detailed investigations into the financial strength of insurance companies to ensure that they can survive the plunge in the value of shares, bonds, property and other assets in which the bulk of their funds are invested. That may have thrown up concerns about Pearl and the terms of its takeover of Resolution, given the dramatic fall in insurance stocks as the financial crisis has unfolded.

Whatever the outcome of the FSA's investigation, it is likely to jeopardise Tiner's hope of getting rich quickly. If Cowdery and his fellow directors are found guilty of any wrongdoing, that would effectively scupper any prospect of Resolution making an acquisition. But even if they are exonerated, it may take some time for Cowdery to repair his reputation.

Tiner, who celebrated his 52nd birthday last month, must have relished the amassing serious money before he retires. The prospectus for the flotation of Resolution, which took place earlier this year, revealed a very generous incentive package for Tiner and Cowdery - although, because they are not directors of the main company but work through a partnership called Resolution Operations, they do not have to disclose the exact amount. 

The five partners of Resolution Operations will be paid £2m a year or "0.5% of the non-cash value of the company", whichever is greater, plus 10% of the "added value" of the acquisitions they bring to the company. If the company is sold - which is likely to be part of the gameplan - they get 30% of the value of the firm. That is a considerable improvement over the £650,000 or so he was earning at the FSA.

Tiner has long had a liking for the things a generous salary can buy. After he took the FSA job, he was embarrassed when an interviewer revealed that he drove a Porsche with the number plate T1 NER, so he switched it for a rather more modest Suzuki Jimmy - but stashed the Porsche in the garage. He has houses in Dorking and Salcombe, the Devon town that could qualify as Knightsbridge-on-Sea, and also enjoys sailing. 

Ironically, Tiner was lauded for introducing a robust regulatory regime for insurers, forcing them to strengthen their capital reserves after the puncturing of the dotcom bubble left some of them looking extremely weak. They were forced to significantly increase their capital strength and conduct regular "stress tests" to ensure they could withstand severe falls in the value of their assets. The FSA has recently been using these powers to force insurers to analyse the impact of falls in the stockmarket of 40% or more on their balance sheets, and has asked accountant KPMG to work with it on monitoring their solvency. But reports that the Resolution investigation stemmed from KPMG's work are believed to be inaccurate.

Other aspects of Tiner's tenure at the FSA are, however, now being questioned. One senior City figure who worked closely with him says he was "never desperately impressed. I always felt he was a bit invisible, a bit prone to take the view of the last person he spoke to".

His tenure certainly coincided with a very light-touch regulatory regime. "A lot of the stuff about the [investment] industry being the FSA's clients and it being there to help came from him," said one former colleague. And Tiner prided himself on his principles-based approach, setting out the framework for regulation rather than imposing detailed rules. "You encourage them to operate fairly and properly in the market, but you don't tell them how to do it," he said during his time as FSA chief executive.

The consequences of encouraging them to operate in the market are now apparent: millions have lost much of their life savings and taxpayers will be propping up the banks for years. The FSA itself is clear about the errors of the old system. Chairman Lord Turner told the Treasury select committee it had not been "the function of the regulator to cast questions over the overall business strategy of the institution".

Tiner declined to be interviewed for this article, but those close to him say it is unfair to blame him for the failings of the FSA as the political climate was to encourage minimal regulation and break down barriers to doing business, rather than raise more. Other international regulators were employing an equally light touch regime and the UK could have been put at a serious disadvantage if it had unilaterally increased regulations on financial services companies. 

Hector Sants, Tiner's successor at the FSA, made it clear in a speech last week that the regime was about to change dramatically: "The limitations of a pure principles-based regime have to be recognised. I continue to believe that the majority of market participants are decent people; however, a principles-based approach does not work with individuals who have no principles."
