When they meet at the G20 London summit in a month's time, Gordon Brown and Barack Obama will both be eager to present themselves as the leaders of a worldwide battle to stave off a 21st century Great Depression and clean up the murky depths of the banking sector. But the dramatic events of the past week - with financiers in furious negotiations to secure billions of pounds more in taxpayers' cash, wild swings on stock markets, and an almighty political spat over one feisty Scotsman's pension - underline the extraordinary scale of the task they face.

From Wall Street to the City, the once-mighty financial institutions that both nourished, and fed on, the boom of the past decade are now locked in a deadly embrace with the rapidly sinking economy. Mass job losses and plunging house prices are driving down the value of the dodgy assets stuck on banks' balance sheets; and the banks, in turn, are bearing down on hard-pressed businesses and families, exacerbating the downturn. Last week saw politicians' most desperate efforts yet to break the vicious cycle.

Here, one senior government figure described the past few days as "hell on earth". In his spare moments between all-night talks with the bankers on the biggest ever government bail-out, Alistair Darling and his officials were sketching plans for April's budget, drawing up demands for the G20 summit and preparing to sanction a policy of quantitative easing - the last roll of the dice for the Bank of England as it battles deflation and depression.

At the same time, president Obama was finalising proposals to "stress-test" the entire American financial system, force vulnerable banks to accept more taxpayer funding - and spend America out of recession.

In a stirring speech to both houses of Congress, Obama promised that "while our economy may be weakened and our confidence shaken, though we are living through difficult and uncertain times, tonight I want every American to know this: we will rebuild, we will recover, and the United States of America will emerge stronger than before". On Thursday, he showed exactly how he planned to do so, delivering a stunningly ambitious budget, that would see the White House plunging into the largest government deficit since the second world war, as Obama implements his election promises to provide universal healthcare and equip the US economy for a greener future, paid for partly by raising taxes on the wealthy.

Republicans responded with fury to this studied attempt to throw off the legacy of the Reagan and Bush years. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said: "Unfortunately, at this juncture, while the American people are tightening their belts, Washington seems to be taking its belt off."

And Obama is also still wrestling with a banking crisis now well over a year old. Much of the American financial system is already on taxpayer-backed life support; yet Treasury secretary Tim Geithner made clear last week that he will need to come back to Congress to ask for more funds, on top of the $700bn already spent propping up ailing financial institutions.

Friday's news that the US economy contracted at an annual rate of 6.2% in the final quarter of 2008 suggested the world's largest economy is in a profound slump. House prices are already down by a total of 27% and well over half a million jobs are being lost every month.

In the UK, where the housing crash began much later, prices have so far fallen by "only" 18%; but losses on corporate property, as well as heavy exposure to bets on toxic instruments backed by sub-prime US loans and domestic mortgages, have left banks on the brink of disaster.

The size of Sir Fred Goodwin's pension pot may have unleashed political fury, and sparked an embarrassing showdown with City minister Lord Myners, but the real battle was going on down at the Treasury as officials and banking executives tried to hammer out an agreement over how much, and on what terms, banks would participate in the government's latest attempt to kick-start the banking sector: the Asset Protection Scheme.

It was a tortuous process: a team of Royal Bank of Scotland negotiators was holed up in the Treasury through the night ahead of its annual results announcement on Thursday with Brown's close lieutenants Baroness Vadera and Lord Myners and a team of top Treasury officials led by the indefatigable Tom Scholar. 

On Thursday night, it was the turn of Lloyds Banking Group. But midnight passed without agreement and it was still stalled over how much it would have to give up to the taxpayer when it unveiled its results on Friday morning. Barclays remains publicly coy about whether it will even participate in the scheme but is already engaged in negotiations over which assets the government might accept.

Lloyds is currently just 43.5% state-owned, and chairman Sir Victor Blank and chief executive Eric Daniels are determined to keep that stake below 50%. With criticism mounting over the controversial decision to press ahead with the takeover of ailing HBOS in the face of an accelerating recession, and without adequate due diligence, they would fear for their jobs should they fail. That makes negotiations over their participation in the scheme especially fraught. Lloyds is believed to want to put £250bn of assets into the scheme, implying a fee of £5bn. But some observers have suggested that, because it is in a stronger position than RBS, the government may want to squeeze more out of it. Lloyds is also believed to be keen to swap the £4bn of preference shares issued as part of last year's rescue package, which carry an expensive 12% interest, for a cheaper form of finance. Again, however, the government will wants to extract full value for any deal.

The Treasury also made it clear that any banks participating in the scheme will have to abide by strict controls on directors' remuneration and bonuses - and given the row over who knew what and when about Goodwin's pension, it is likely that will be strictly policed. 

That could be one of the sticking points for Barclays, which prides itself on having, so far, resisted taking up any government assistance, preferring instead to raise even more expensive finance from a collection of Far Eastern investors. It will be keen to avoid giving the government a stake, and thus a say in the bonuses of its Barclays Capital investment banking executives, if it possibly can.

The wider question, however, is whether the scheme will actually work. Ministers believe it will finally draw a line under many months of lurching sell-offs, by shoring up stricken banks once and for all.

History is not particularly encouraging: Citigroup was given a similar deal by the US authorities, with a 4% upfront fee, but it was back in Washington last week, negotiating another infusion of taxpayer funds. ING was given a similar deal for free by the Belgian authorities; but its shares remain at rock bottom. Darling dearly hopes that the deal marks the beginning of the end of the financial crisis, but only time will tell.

For those in Obama's spanking new economic team, last week must have been a roller-coaster ride, chillingly reminiscent of the scenes of chaos and confusion they witnessed from outside the White House last autumn. 

Share prices on Wall Street plunged to their lowest level since 1997 on Monday, as investors fretted about the lack of detail in the plans - and the White House even felt obliged to reaffirm its confidence in Geithner.

Rumours were swirling about a full-blown nationalisation of Citigroup, and an emergency break-up plan for the insurer AIG, which Washington "rescued" last year.

In the weeks after Lehman Brothers went bust in September, Washington tried time and again to stabilise a traumatised Wall Street. Treasury secretary Hank Paulson got down on his knees to persuade House leader Nancy Pelosi to pass his $700bn Troubled Assets Relief Program, and President Bush warned that, without the bail-out, "this sucker could go down!". 

But even after Congress signed up, investors couldn't shake the gnawing fear that after Lehman's demise, anything could happen.

Back then, Gordon Brown presented his recapitalisation of the banking sector as a template for the rest of the world to follow; but the slide into recession has been faster and harder than anyone could then have foreseen, and the period of calm proved to be short-lived.

Last week's insurance scheme, together with a new capital injection for the nationalised Northern Rock to help it ramp up its mortgage lending, is meant to shore up the embattled sector once and for all. With this giant financial sticking-plaster on the banks, chancellor Alistair Darling will now have to turn his attention to the next knotty problem in his in-tray: how to pull the economy out of its nose-dive.

Mervyn King, along with several members of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee, has indicated that with interest rates now at just 1%, he is ready to consider quantitative easing - buying up billions of pounds' worth of government bonds from banks, in the hope that they will push it straight out of the door again in loans to families and businesses, flooding the economy with cash. The chancellor and the governor are expected to exchange letters early this week outlining how much the Bank can spend on the policy; and when the nine-member MPC meets next week, it could cut rates even lower, and will almost certainly give the green light to quantitative easing.

In monetary policy terms, this is the nuclear option. John Wraith, fixed income strategist at RBC Capital Markets, says the Bank could demand up to £200bn of taxpayers' funds to spend on its new weapon. "Almost by definition with this sort of policy, if you're going to do it, you've got to make it striking: there's no point in fiddling around the edges," he says.

Quantitative easing is enormously dangerous. By piling aggressively into the market to drive down interest rates and pump out cash, the Bank risks inflating a new market bubble - in bonds. However, King believes that long-term risk is outweighed by the short-term threat of an even longer, more severe recession, which would drive inflation well below the government's 2% target.

Since the dawn of the credit crunch, in the summer of 2007, world leaders have been forced to think the unthinkable, over and over again, nationalising crippled institutions, wading into once sacrosanct financial markets, and unleashing the public's fury on the bankers they once lauded as wealth-creators. On both sides of the Atlantic, politicians hope last week's frenzied onslaught on the economic and financial crisis will give way to a period of calm - but they must know by now not to bank on it.

