It was the ultimate proof of the City's burgeoning power over New York. At least that's what it looked like when London-based Roger Nagioff replaced Wall Street's Michael Gelband as Lehman Brothers' global head of the firm's fixed-income division in May 2007.

Dick Fuld, the chairman and chief executive of Lehman Brothers, told his PR minders to portray the appointment as a sign of how his booming empire had broadened into a truly global operation.

And, before the first signs of the banking collapse that was to sweep America and Europe appeared, it was faithfully reported that Gelband, who had been at the bank for 24 years, was running an underperforming division and that one of London's finest could do better. Gelband, it was said, was leaving the firm "to pursue other interests". 

The truth, though, was somewhat different. Gelband was, according to Lehman insiders, at loggerheads with Fuld's lieutenants. He had railed against a huge buying of a collection of sub-prime mortgage lenders, and also in particular a $15bn property consortium bid, led by Lehman, to buy America's biggest apartment company at the top of the market.

That deal was signed off by the bank's entire executive committee - but not by Gelband, because he no longer sat on it. According to Lehman insiders, he was almost alone among the 26,000-strong organisation in being prepared to stand up to the now disgraced former chairman and chief executive of what has become the world's biggest bankrupt company.

Almost alone, but not quite: there was one other. Madelyn Antoncic, a 12-year veteran of Goldman Sachs, a former board member at Barclays Capital - and a senior figure in the Girl Scout Movement of New York - was the managing director of Lehman's management committee and the firm's chief risk officer. 

At Lehman, Antoncic reported directly to Fuld. But it is understood that her unease at the huge bets being taken by the bank was something Fuld's entourage were not inclined to hear. 

That may partly explain a New York Stock Exchange filing just three months after Gelband was ousted. In effect, it revealed that Antoncic was being sidelined: the statement announced the appointment of a new global head of risk management and that Antoncic was to be given "the newly created role" of global head of financial policy relations.

Andrew Gowers, the former Financial Times editor who left to become head of communications for Lehman in London, had a close-up view of a corporate culture that saw professional, knowledgeable risk managers sidelined in the rush to catch a rising market and gain ground on Lehman's pre-eminent rival, Goldman Sachs. 

"It was quite hard to stand in the way," he says. "That's not to say they didn't have proper risk management processes in place: they had some very good people doing it. The very senior managers said if we do more we could get closer to Goldman Sachs. There was risk management, but the prevailing atmosphere was for fast growth and special fast-track treatment for what we now know were toxic deals."

It emerged last week that the ousting of risk managers and sceptics who were convinced the banks they were supervising were flying too close to the sun was by no means solely an American phenomenon. 

As shares in Lloyds Banking Group, the company formed after Lloyds TSB's merger with HBOS, tumbled by as much as 40% in the wake of its warning that HBOS losses would be far worse than expected, Paul Moore, who was head of group regulatory risk at HBOS between 2002 and 2005, gave the world an inkling as to how and why Britain's biggest mortgage lender had collapsed. 

Moore raised repeated concerns about risks at HBOS and ended up being dismissed. Last Wednesday, that revelation led to the resignation of Sir James Crosby, who was Moore's boss at the time. Worse still, the organisation that Crosby was forced to resign from was the government's financial watchdog, the Financial Services Authority. He was personally appointed to his role at the FSA by Gordon Brown - a huge embarrassment to a prime minister with a reputation for fiscal competence.

Moore's written evidence to the powerful Treasury select committee, published last week, described bank bosses as being "in an environment like a fast-moving river". Moore's submission read: "They were not inclined to listen to a different view... I was one person speaking out with experience who did see, in a generic sense, the writing on the wall."

In his dossier Moore claimed he had been repeatedly threatened after warning internally that HBOS was "going too fast", "had a cultural indisposition to challenge" and "was a serious risk to financial stability and consumer protection". Moore was subsequently replaced, he alleged, by a less experienced member of staff. 

His claims, rejected by HBOS, were investigated by its own auditor, KPMG. Moore's assertions had no credibility, KPMG concluded. Moore, through his lawyer, hit back last week, suggesting that KPMG's role as HBOS's auditor meant it had not been in a position to reach an independent view.

For the FSA, the idea that its second-in-command allegedly helped to silence one of the few voices warning that HBOS was flirting with disaster was a calamitous one, made worse because the regulator subsequently admitted it had undertaken repeated investigations focusing on HBOS's financial strength and found nothing untoward. 

Insiders at the FSA hold their hands up and suggest that, rather than blaming individuals, it is more appropriate to call into question the entire system of regulators, Treasury officials, ministers and international institutions. Last week it confirmed that its budget to hire more "financial police" would be increased to get the best talent available, and indicated a continuing preference for candidates with industry experience. There are, at least, plenty of unemployed bankers to choose from.

Whatever the truth of Moore's claims, one thing is clear: deal frenzy had taken hold among the majority of western banks and no credit or trading limit would be allowed to get in the way. Regardless of Moore's devastating submission, it has been clear for years that risk controls at banks had gone out of the window. "People were basically running around with the Scottish banks' cheque books saying: 'I'll have that. I'll have that'," says a leading property investor. "It was like that with the Irish banks too. Nothing was ever questioned." 

A senior private equity source says that banks were offering unnecessarily high multiples of debt to finance leveraged deals, and sometimes their own equity to boot. The reason was simple: banks were incentivising their staff to shovel cash out of the door. Fees were paid to the bank for the loans they arranged, and bankers' bonuses were tied to lending targets. 

A London-based financier at an American bank says: "It was fairly obvious the risk committees didn't work. What happened was the treasury function and the commercial department took over. There were so few people in the organisations who knew exactly what the position was. You suspect there were a lot of people in the treasury teams putting data in their top drawer rather than in the spreadsheet. 

"At the time you suspected prices were too hot and that the numbers didn't stack up. But you never said anything. You thought either they knew more than you or you were stupid." 

These days, despite appearances, banks are doing their best not to look stupid. Robert Le Blanc, who has been group financial risk director at Barclays since 2004, was wheeled out at its full-year results presentation for the first time as part of the bank's efforts to persuade the City that its risk control measures are robust, and that its provisions against losses are sensible.

Le Blanc boasted that, at the end of 2007, when most forecasters were predicting continued growth, Barclays was already planning for a downturn based on its reckoning that rising property prices and high corporate and personal borrowings meant "we should prepare for a much weaker scenario" in the future. "Our executive committee launched a formal programme to give greater protection across all our credit portfolios in the UK, the US, Spain and South Africa," Le Blanc said. "These included more than 300 'immediate actions' that had clear benefits and were fast to implement, such as changes to lending criteria, to limits and to collections. We also decided to take more than 100 'strategic actions' such as giving up market share to get a better risk-return balance, increasing hedging, at a significant cost, and being the first bank in South Africa to tighten our terms for mortgage lending."

In Britain specifically, Barclays says that its study of borrowing levels highlighted imminent dangers. "For many years, our UK team has tracked the level of gearing across UK companies because we have learned that when company gearing increases, corporate insolvency levels follow about two years later," Le Blanc said. 

As gearing levels rose, Barclays claims to have tightened its borrowing limits, particularly in higher risk areas like commercial property and leveraged lending. That said, it has been a huge lender to the leveraged private equity takeovers of Alliance Boots and the deal that saw Saga and the AA merge. It has yet to write down the value of those loans, made at the top of the market 18 months ago.

At troubled RBS, meanwhile, the mood is predictably less bullish. Chief executive Stephen Hester told the Treasury select committee on 11 February: "I think the risk management systems at RBS need a lot of change and I can't do it all in a couple of weeks. We need to keep upgrading and improving and we're putting in some major changes as we speak, but it will take some time to get those absolutely right."

Peter Nathanial has been in charge of RBS's risk management since January 2007, with a team of approximately 4,400. Nathanial's predecessor, Richard Gossage, held the position for five years.

Over at HSBC, Brian Robertson, a group managing director with more than 30 years' experience, has been chief risk officer since January 2005. He previously handled credit risk management in Asia and the US. 

He is also a member of the group management board, the executive committee responsible for the management and day-to-day execution of group strategy. A separate risk management committee, chaired by finance director Douglas Flint, has responsibility for exercising and delegating risk approval authority, setting the level of "risk appetite" and reviewing the efficacy of HSBC's risk-control framework. 

At Northern Rock - where the risk committee's failure to appreciate the damage to its business model that a freezing of the wholesale mortgage market would inflict - risk management has been beefed up considerably since it was nationalised a year ago. 

"In 2008, the risk and control environment was significantly enhanced. Part of this process was the appointment of Rick Hunkin as chief risk officer. Rick is part of the executive team at Northern Rock, and reports directly to the chief executive," says a spokesman.

Inside the big banks, senior risk managers, who typically would be ranked one tier below board directors, would oversee retail, wholesale and investment banking operations. 

Ken Farrow, a risk specialist and director of investigations at the corporate advisory body Control Risk, says: "There would be lines of communication between each division and all would operate a traffic light system, so in the event of an amber or red light, action could be taken swiftly to remedy problems." At least, that's the theory.

But no matter what risk officers say or do, it seems to be the directors who have the final say. There is no way Royal Bank of Scotland, for instance, could have made the top-of-the-market purchase of Dutch bank ABN Amro without near-unanimous board approval. The impression given is that Sir Fred Goodwin, the bank's former chief executive, railroaded decisions through meetings, although the board has denied this. 

Just like at Lehman's, the cult of personality appears to have triumphed over the battalions of risk professionals who were meant to stand firm against financial instability.
