ALEX SALMOND took his case for Scottish independence to the United States this week, boldly seeking to link the SNP's cause to America's 18th century struggle to free itself from British rule.

The First Minister claimed the Scottish Government's vision of "freedom" was the same as that which inspired the America's 1776 Declaration of Independence.

And he predicted the "timeless principle" enshrined in the Declaration of Arbroath in 1320ADVERTISEMENT, which influenced America's founding fathers, would come full circle with Scottish independence.

Any Americans depending on Mr Salmond for their understanding of what's happening in Scotland might be forgiven for thinking the country was about to stage a tartan version of the Boston Tea Party.

Meanwhile, back in Scotland, Mr Salmond's Finance Minister was setting out options for increasing the Scottish Parliament's tax powers. After presenting his document explaining the various degrees of "fiscal autonomy" which might be available, John Swinney unsurprisingly said the Government's preference was for full independence.

But the report is being widely interpreted as opening the door to "devo max" – full tax powers for Holyrood, but with Scotland staying inside the UK – as a compromise option if independence cannot win enough support.

Mr Salmond has been accused by opposition politicians of breaching diplomatic protocol by using his US visit to attack the British Government. Scottish Tory leader Annabel Goldie says he abused his position because he was in the States representing Scotland as First Minister, not the leader of a "minority party".

But Mr Salmond won't be unduly concerned about such attacks. After all, the trip gave him the publicity coup of a meeting with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. He was also able to announce the formation of a 30-strong Friends of Scotland caucus in the US Senate to promote links between the two countries.

However much anyone might take issue with it, his lecture at Washington's Georgetown University gave him a world platform for his independence message.

Tartan Week is a well-established annual event in the US which gives senior Scottish politicians the chance to parade through the streets of New York and promote Scottish businesses. But this was a different kind of opportunity.

Mr Salmond told his audience: "I speak here today as the head of the Scottish Government. And yet the ancient nation of Scotland remains, for the time being, a member of the United Kingdom rather than a fully independent country.

"Only with full responsibility for our destiny can we make Scotland an even better nation. Make our people more free, more prosperous and more secure. That is our vision. And it is the same vision that resonates in your Declaration of Independence."

Mr Swinney's message about fiscal autonomy was ostensibly similar – "An independent Scotland with full control of all financial levers would both be able to do more in the short term and put our country on the path to long-term success."

But while his report was dismissive of the status quo – "not a positive option for Scotland" – and unimpressed by assigned revenues – "could leave Scotland worse off" – and enhanced devolution – "would not match the economic ambitions of Scotland" – it was much warmer towards "devo max".

The Government said this option, giving Holyrood "maximum policy discretion" short of independence, "would provide significant autonomy" and "represent a significant step forward". Mr Salmond has long made clear he is willing to include a "more powers" option alongside independence and the status quo in the SNP's promised referendum.

And if the Liberal Democrats – who have long supported maximum devolution – could be persuaded to drop their opposition to a referendum, the SNP could be well on the way towards securing a majority of MSPs backing a major increase in Holyrood's powers and ready to put the issue to the voters.

It may not have the same romantic appeal as the vision of "freedom" Mr Salmond evoked in his Washington lecture but it could offer the SNP an attractive alternative to seeing their core belief rejected at the ballot box.

Labour's support, announced this week, for borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament adds to the picture of a growing consensus for further devolution, although the party will be keen to avoid anything which makes it look as if it has got into bed with the Nationalists.

The Scottish Government has earmarked St Andrew's Day, November 30, 2010, as the date for its independence referendum and Mr Salmond has appointed the extremely capable Mike Russell as the minister to take charge of the build-up to it.

There is still no evidence of a majority in favour of independence – but that will not deter the SNP.

The party has shown this week that it is more than happy to mix passion and pragmatism, romance and reality to promote its cause at every opportunity. 

Latest polls claim an increase in those supporting independence and a drop in those opposed to Scotland going it alone. Opposition parties have no room for complacency