IT has been slated for its lack of specific recommendations and its noncommittal commentary – but the Calman commission's first report on the future of devolution has still resulted in sharply divided political opinion.
One Tory MSP said the report is "a fine starting point" and "a lot better than I expected".

But senior Liberal Democrats have seized on the commission's rejection of the transfer of all tax powers to Holyrood as evidence it is not going to be radiADVERTISEMENTcal enough.

Sir Kenneth and his colleagues – appointed earlier this year by Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories to look at more powers for the Scottish Parliament – were never expected to produce firm proposals at this stage.

They did, however, flag up the areas of responsibility – such as defence and foreign affairs – where they believe devolution would be "undesirable in principle"; other areas – like broadcasting, firearms and drugs misuse – where there was a "plausible case" for further consideration; and still more – including employment law and immigration – where they said they had not yet received sufficient evidence to decide if there was a case for further consideration.

And the report specifically endorsed the view of the independent group of advisers that "full fiscal autonomy" – where Scotland would have complete responsibility for setting and collecting all taxes north of the border – would be inconsistent with maintaining the Union.

Sir Kenneth described the report as "a staging post" and "a stepping stone". "It sets out how far we have come in the last seven months and sets the agenda for discussion of Scotland's constitutional future and the next phase of our work."

One senior Tory MSP welcomed the report as "a fine starting point", "very comprehensive" and "a lot better than I expected".

He said: "It's a big discussion document. We have to admit that the very existence of the Calman commission was, in part, to counter the National Conversation, so it doesn't start from a position of political neutrality. But it doesn't get hung up on the issues that are seen as newsworthy."

However, a leading Liberal Democrat said the report is "disappointing".

"The early signals are it is not going to produce radical measures. For them to say full fiscal autonomy is inconsistent with the Union is palpable nonsense.

"If that's the benchmark, I'm not hopeful this is going to come up with anything radical at all.

"We had hoped for some vision, some enthusiasm and some direction – but this is certainly not that.

The interim report – in two volumes, a main report of 118 pages and a summary of evidence running to 152 pages – says devolution has been "a great success".

But it underlines its starting point is that Scotland should remain "an integral and distinctive part of the UK".

On the crucial question of finance, the report identifies three broad funding arrangements: the current block grant from Westminster; assigning the revenue from taxes raised in Scotland to the Scottish Parliament; and devolving control of taxes to Holyrood.

It says the mix of funding mechanisms will be determined ultimately by the sort of Union Scotland is to have with the rest of the UK. And it is going to look at the question of giving the Scottish Parliament borrowing powers.

But as well as surveying responsibilities where powers could be transferred, the report also looks at the way Scottish and UK governments work together.

It says the "essentially informal" relations between Edinburgh and London over the first eight years of devolution – often based on relationships between individual politicians and officials – would not be sustainable in the years ahead. And it suggests there should be "more effective processes" for resolving power clashes.

But the commission also ventures into controversial territory when it highlights evidence from the UK Government and CBI Scotland about the potential ability of the Scottish Government to "frustrate" Westminster plans for new nuclear power stations by use of its powers over planning or electricity generation.

"This is an example of where a particular division of responsibilities creates an overlap or ambiguity that has the potential to create real friction."

Sir Kenneth and his colleagues carefully do not say how the conflict should be resolved, but their reference to it is being seen as a hint that this could be one area where powers might be transferred from Holyrood to Westminster.

A Labour MSP insisted that is not a realistic option. "I don't know why he said that. Perhaps he was trying to be even-handed and come up with something that should go the other way. But it's not going to happen. It would be political madness for anyone to try to do that."

But the MSP argued the key question is whether Calman is prepared to go for bold financial change.

"It's the financial bullet he has to bite. If we end up with no financial changes, it has been a failure.

"Assigned revenues on their own are no good. It has to be a mixture of assigned and devolved taxes. We have to have some responsibility for our own revenue, as well as our expenditure."

Sir Kenneth and his colleagues plan to continue gathering evidence on the issues over the next few months, before producing their final report, probably in June next year.

Then he will have to come up with some recommendations – and another debate can begin.
