AMERICANS queued round the block for hours to cast their votes in the historic election which will see Barack Obama become the first black US President.
One senior Scottish Nationalist pondered whether the enthusiasm for democracy would be transmitted across the Atlantic to voters in today's Glenrothes by-election. 

"I wonder if it will galvanise people to go out and feel they can make a differencADVERTISEMENTe," he said.

The prospect of long queues at polling stations in Fife – or in Edinburgh's Forth ward, where there is a city council by-election today – may be unlikely. 

But, as in America, turnout could be crucial in both contests.

Just a few weeks ago, Glenrothes looked almost a guaranteed SNP gain. The Nationalists had the wind in their sails and the seat left vacant by the death of stalwart Labour MP John MacDougall required less of a swing than they achieved in Glasgow East in July. It was the SNP's to lose.

But since then the global financial crisis has seen Labour bounce back, Gordon Brown's reputation restored and the contest change dramatically. SNP leaders still believe they are on course to win, but all sides predict a much closer finish.

One Labour source says the mood of the party's traditional supporters has gone from being apathetic to being strong and proud.

If Labour managed to hold on, it would be a major achievement, given the bad time the party has been having up until now. And even if the SNP just shade it, the victory will look poor when compared with the "earthquake" of Glasgow East.

The Glenrothes seat contains not only the new town itself, which is expected to vote mainly SNP, but also lots of smaller former mining communities, which are more solidly Labour.

A senior SNP politician believes the party will pull off another triumph, but only by a narrow margin. "It will be tight," he says.

Labour has been working flat out in the past few days, hoping to overtake the Nationalists. 

A Labour organiser says: "It's just a question of who comes out to vote."

Meanwhile, turnout will also be a major factor in today's council by-election in the Capital's Forth ward, caused by the sudden death of long-serving councillor Elizabeth Maginnis.

But a complicating factor, which makes all the parties reluctant to make predictions, is the voting system which requires people to rank the candidates in order of preference – 1, 2, 3, etc – even though only one person is being elected.

No-one is likely to get over 50 per cent of the first preferences, which means the candidate with the fewest votes will drop out and have their votes reallocated to the candidates marked "2". This process continues until one candidate achieves 50 per cent or until only two candidates are left and the one with the most votes wins.

In last year's council elections in Forth, Labour had the most first preference votes, followed by the SNP, the Liberal Democrats and the Tories.

Labour expects to be ahead again on the first count, but will not reach 50 per cent. So the crucial factor is the second preferences of the voters whose first choices drop out.

The main battle is seen as being between Labour and the SNP, but both acknowledge that because the Lib Dems are popular as a second choice, their candidate is in with a chance too.

Big Brother Celebrity Hijack winner John Loughton, standing as an independent, also believes he will benefit from second preferences.

Other parties were initially worried that the 21-year-old from Pilton – who says he would be Edinburgh's youngest-ever councillor if he won – could take the seat, but they do not believe his campaign has been big enough to succeed.

Mr Loughton stops short of claiming he will get elected, but insists he has fulfilled his objectives of promoting grassroots engagement and people power.

A senior Labour source claims voters are worried about the threat of school closures and voluntary sector cuts, but blame the Lib Dems rather than the SNP. 

And a leading SNP councillor claims the Nationalists are picking up a lot of support from ex-Labour voters impressed with the SNP's record at Holyrood, such as starting the abolition of prescription charges, and its role in the city council.

"There is a feelgood factor for the SNP. We've had a year and a half of the Scottish Government and a year and a half of a different administration in the city. People are seeing what the SNP can do when it is in a position of influence."

He says the previous two Labour councillors for the area, Cllr Maginnis and Billy Fitzpatrick, were both well known figures with a personal vote.

"As far as we're concerned, everything is up for grabs now."

An SNP – or Lib Dem – victory would give the city council's ruling coalition a proper majority for the first time, taking the combined Lib Dem-SNP membership to 30 as against 28 for the other parties.

At the moment, the administration has to rely on the casting vote of the Lord Provost, George Grubb, on crucial issues, which politicises a post intended to be above the fray.

The senior SNP source says: "We have operated successfully on the casting vote for the past 18 months without major mishap and we are quite prepared to continue doing that.

"However, a vote for an administration councillor would be seen as a welcome vote of endorsement."

Neither Glenrothes nor Forth is going to provide such a dramatic result as Tuesday's US elections. But both have the potential to bring about change in their own ways.
