IT'S almost a year since Finance Secretary John Swinney announced he had a done a deal with Scotland's councils, paving the way for a freeze on council tax. Local authorities across the country, including Edinburgh, duly delivered the zero increase outlined in the "concordat" signed between the Scottish Government and council leaders.

It was a major coup for the SNP Government, then just six months in office.

But there was more to the concordat than freezing council tax bills – and it's the small print of the agreement which is now coming back to disrupt the impressive harmony ADVERTISEMENTwitnessed 12 months ago.

The deal between Mr Swinney and the leaders of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (Cosla) also set out a series of commitments – some from the Government, like delivering an extra 1000 police officers and cutting business rates, and some from the councils, including reducing class sizes to a maximum of 18 "as quickly as possible" and "making substantial progress" towards a 50 per cent increase in pre-school hours for three and four-year-olds.

There was a reduction in "ring-fencing" – where the Government allocated councils specific amounts for specific purposes. Instead, councils were given more flexibility over how they used their funding, but each local authority had to sign up to "single outcome agreements" covering a whole range of responsibilities.

Labour seized on the absence of a deadline or cutting class sizes to claim "another broken promise".

And with Edinburgh pressing ahead with school closures, while at the same time being denied any extra cash for replacing or refurbishing school buildings, it was indeed difficult to see what progress could be made towards smaller classes.

But it was last month when Education Secretary Fiona Hyslop announced that free school meals for all P1-3 pupils would be rolled out across Scotland that it looked as if the agreement was beginning to fall apart. School lunches were there in the concordat – a clause saying that if the pilot scheme was a success, all councils would provide the free meals from August 2010.

The Government insisted the money to pay for it, estimated at £30m across Scotland, was also included in the deal the council leaders had signed up to. But one council after another warned it did not have enough cash to implement the policy without having to make cuts elsewhere.

Edinburgh education convener Marilyne MacLaren declared: "Such a policy will be very difficult if insufficient additional money is available to fund it."

Then Mr Swinney announced another freeze in the council tax for next year, while planning to give councils just £70m – the same as last year – to compensate them for foregoing an increase, despite inflation and soaring fuel costs.

City council leader Jenny Dawe took an optimistic view, saying it was "odds-on" that Edinburgh would deliver a further year's freeze. But not all councils were so sanguine. Glasgow declared another zero rise "nigh on impossible".

So how much longer can the concordat survive, with more and more demands being made on it?

Edinburgh finance convener Gordon Mackenzie says more money is needed, but argues the concordat recognises that. He says: "The situation has changed since the agreement was signed, but that is why the agreement was worded so that the figures are looked at every year.

"The huge rise in energy prices has made things really difficult for us and we would be looking for an increase from the Scottish Government to cover this.

"You have to remember the single outcome agreements with the Government were not a one-way process and we have our own agreements too.

"The likes of free school meals and reducing class sizes are things that we want to do, it is just that without an increase in funding to reflect the changed circumstances then we will not make as much progress as we would like to."

Professor Richard Kerley of Edinburgh's Queen Margaret University, himself a one-time finance convener for the Capital, is more sceptical.

Councils who were initially very positive about the concordat are now beginning to see the downside, he says.

"Increasingly the Government is telling councils: 'Everything is provided for in the concordat and the support funding we agreed to give you'.

"In themselves these extra demands may be small sums of money, but when you add them up they put an increasing strain on local authorities."

He believes the concordat cannot last the full term until 2010-11.

"I'm sceptical about whether it will survive the pressures of next year and I certainly don't think it will survive the following year."

The concordat was hailed as a success for the SNP a year ago, not just because it froze the council tax across Scotland, but because it also showed the SNP had established a better working relationship with Cosla than Labour had managed for some time.

SNP ministers have made such a point of this that it has now become a joke that the agreement is never referred to as "the concordat", but always "the historic concordat".

The question is whether the concordat is now in danger of becoming history in another sense altogether.
