THE SNP's conference agenda is a veritable A-Z of worthy issues – from allotments to zero-rating for VAT on repairs to historic buildings.
But the three-and-a-half days of deliberations by Scotland's ruling party will be overshadowed by the same subjects that are dominating the news headlines and individuals' thoughts – the global economic crisis, the collapse of Scotland's biggest baADVERTISEMENTnks and what it means for people's jobs, homes and futures.

First Minister Alex Salmond was opening the gathering in Perth this afternoon. It's the SNP's second annual conference as a party of government, but the backdrop to this year's event is very different from last year's.

Last October – just five months after the elections that saw them oust the previous Labour-Lib Dem coalition – the SNP's top politicians were relishing their new positions of power and talking of the historic nature of the occasion.

But a year on, while the SNP is still riding high in the opinion polls, the scale of the global crisis has reduced Mr Salmond and his colleagues to fairly small players. And, more seriously for their long-term aim of independence, the crisis is undermining the case for Scotland becoming a self-supporting state in a turbulent world.

For the Nationalists, who have so far managed to maintain their popularity and use the past 18 months to introduce a range of popular – not to say populist – policies, such as abolishing bridge tolls, scrapping graduate endowment fees, freezing the council tax and phasing out prescription charges, the financial crisis is bad news in more ways than one.

In a preface to the conference agenda, Alex Salmond says it has been "another tremendous year for our party".

He adds: "We've been working hard to earn and keep the trust of the Scottish people. We are focused on building Scottish success and improving the quality of life of families and communities across our nation."

The SNP's commanding position in the Scottish political scene has also subtly altered though.

The Government faces continuing controversy over the Scottish Futures Trust, the Nationalists' alternative to private finance initiatives, as well as its plans to replace the council tax with a local income tax.

The announcement of free school meals for all P1-P3 pupils in Scotland immediately ran into trouble when several councils, including Edinburgh, said they did not have enough money to pay for the initiative and the Government said it would not be providing any more.

Labour, in disarray for most of the past year, is now beginning to live up to its role as the main opposition party.

New leader Iain Gray has been praised for his performances at First Minister's Questions, which have had Mr Salmond looking uncomfortable several times.

Also, Gordon Brown's decision to reinstate a full-time Scottish Secretary in the shape of Jim Murphy means there is now more Labour firepower directed at the SNP administration.

The outcome of the Glenrothes by-election, which Labour had almost written off as another humiliating SNP victory, is now looking less certain because the financial crisis has helped boost Gordon Brown's reputation. 

The Prime Minister's decision to campaign in the constituency – after he was criticised for avoiding the by-election in Glasgow East – is a sign of growing optimism.

Mr Salmond's own background as an economist with the Royal Bank of Scotland means he should be better equipped than most to analyse the current crisis.

The banking collapse is tricky territory though, because whatever steps he suggests and comments he makes on the UK Government's initiatives, the fact remains that all the action on this is at Westminster.

The past few days have seen first other European countries and then the United States following Mr Brown's lead and using his rescue package as a model for their own.

Mr Brown has argued the banking crisis has proved the case for the Union and the £37 billion bail-out for RBS, Lloyds TSB and HBoS would not have been possible in an independent Scotland.

Mr Salmond has seen his concept of an "Arc of Prosperity" – small nations like Ireland and Iceland which have thrived as independent countries – rubbished before his eyes as they too are caught up in the crisis.

One SNP insider says: "The bluff has been called on the Arc of Prosperity – some people still believe it, but the crisis has uncovered serious underlying issues.

"This is a seminal moment and it has to be addressed as such. Cheap shots at Gordon Brown and going on about Glenrothes will not hit the mark."

In his preface to the conference, Mr Salmond promises the SNP will continue its "can-do" approach to government. But, when it comes to the global economic crisis, the truth is there is not much the First Minister and his colleagues can do.
