JUST when she thought it was safe to go back to normal politics, a new problem has appeared for Wendy Alexander – and this time it comes from her own side. No sooner had she put the dodgy donation row behind her and shrugged off SNP cries of "whitewaADVERTISEMENTsh" than she found her initiative to secure more powers for Holyrood under attack from her own Westminster colleagues.

First there were reports that Prime Minister Gordon Brown wanted to downgrade her proposed cross-party Scottish Constitutional Commission to a "review" or a "working group" and ensure that it was driven from Westminster rather than Scotland.

Ms Alexander denied the reports and No 10 said it was "wholly supportive of Wendy's work".

But then Scotland Office minister David Cairns gave a newspaper interview in which he argued there was no case for further devolution, dismissing the call for more powers for the Scottish Parliament as a concern of the "McChattering classes". The comments were not what Ms Alexander needed.

Her plan for a constitutional commission, unveiled in a St Andrew's Day speech, was a bold step. It represented a significant change in policy – Labour had argued during last year's election there was no need for more powers – which was welcomed by many MSPs and activists.

Ms Alexander regards the initiative as proof of her independence from the UK party bosses in London.

So Scottish Labour politicians are exasperated at their colleagues at Westminster for undermining the idea – especially when it offers a potential way forward for a party still struggling to adapt to being out of power.

One senior figure diplomatically says Mr Cairns' interview was "unhelpful". Another has a more candid description, calling the statements "staggering political ineptitude".

Mr Cairns' comments are seen as reflecting the attitude of many backbench Scottish MPs at Westminster, who have long regarded the Scottish Parliament with a degree of suspicion or even hostility. 

Some worry that he may also be signalling the view from inside the UK Government.

"I don't think David Cairns was working entirely on his own initiative," says one party insider.

"There are certainly some MPs who fear their authority or position could be undermined if more powers were transferred to Holyrood. But they should let Wendy get back on the front foot. 

"To bring it up now just gives the SNP more ammunition. It's a bit unfair to drop her in it again when she seems just to be out of the woods."

It had been assumed that Ms Alexander had obtained at least the tacit approval of the Prime Minister before launching the Constitutional Commission proposal. She is, after all, one of his closest allies in Scotland. But it is now said that Mr Brown told a meeting in Downing Street on January 28, attended by Chancellor Alistair Darling, Justice Secretary Jack Straw and Scottish Secretary Des Browne, that he wanted the UK Government, not Holyrood, to take the lead in setting up the new body, adding that he did not feel the word "commission" was appropriate, preferring it to be called a "working party" or "review". 

Such a move would not only be a slap in the face for Ms Alexander but also a death-blow to cross-party co-operation on the issue. For Ms Alexander, trying to resume normal service after the "distraction" of the donation row and establish herself as leader of a viable opposition, the last thing she wants is to be portrayed as a puppet being operated from Westminster.

However, a Labour source says Ms Alexander's closeness to the Prime Minister can work both ways. Although she can sometimes be seen as doing his bidding, she also has his ear.

"She has a far better chance of getting her own way than any other politician in Scotland," says the source.

"She showed in her St Andrew's Day speech that she has the courage to stand up to London if necessary."

Ms Alexander firmly believes in stronger powers for the Scottish Parliament, including control of some taxes, and she is ready to work across party lines to explore the options – but clearly not everyone in her party agrees. There are tensions inside the Conservative Party on the issue as well. 

Only the Liberal Democrats are united on the need for more powers for Holyrood.

The impetus for the Constitutional Commission comes from the SNP's victory last May, and the feeling that voters must be offered a coherent alternative to independence – even though there is little evidence of a demand for Scotland to go it alone.

The Scottish Social Attitude Survey shows support for independence remarkably steady at nine to eleven per cent over the nine years since the Scottish Parliament was set up. 

Backing for devolution with tax powers fluctuates a little more – dipping in 2004 and 2005 particularly – but now as high as it has ever been at 54 per cent, above even the figure in 1999.

If the commission is going to go ahead, Ms Alexander and the other leaders need to find a respected, high-profile figure to chair it and move quickly to get it launched. The attacks coming from south of the Border make it more important than ever that the commission is seen to be a credible body that will create a clear consensus on new powers.
