THE Scottish Nationalists have regularly been accused of pursuing populist policies since they took over after the elections in May.

From scrapping Forth Road Bridge tolls to ending the graduate endowment fee, Alex Salmond's government has had a keen eye for what will go down well with the voters.

But there is one area where policies are being taken forward with commendable detADVERTISEMENTermination despite the risk of alienating at least some sections of public opinion.

Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill has repeatedly declared his intention to do all in his power to change Scotland's "bevvy culture".

Too many Scots, he believes, do not just have a drink as part of a good night out but instead simply drink to get drunk. And given the wrong circumstances, that can lead to violence, antisocial behaviour and worse.

Just last week, the latest homicide figures for Scotland showed a 27 per cent increase and at least 30 per cent of people accused of homicide were drunk at the time of the offence.

"Why can't we be more like our continental cousins who can enjoy an evening out without getting legless?" wonders Mr MacAskill.

He did, of course, have his own famous brush with the law soon after being elected an MSP back in 1999 – getting arrested before an England v Scotland match at Wembley Stadium and being held in the cells on suspicion of being drunk and disorderly for the duration of the match.

When he was appointed Justice Secretary, many thought the episode would keep coming back to haunt him. It has indeed been mentioned on several occasions when Mr MacAskill has been fronting new initiatives on binge drinking or antisocial behaviour. 

But he has turned it to his own advantage by acknowledging it frankly and accepting responsibility. "I erred and paid the price and I hope others can learn from my errors," he said.

"It took this wake-up call for me to address my drinking, to realise I could enjoy a pint or two in the evening but to stop before I had too many."

Now he is pushing a whole series of initiatives from banning irresponsible promotions in off-licences to proposing that pubs and clubs should foot the bill for antisocial behaviour.

In the longer term, he wants to tackle Scotland's drink problem by achieving a change in personal and cultural attitudes towards alcohol.

Changing attitudes is easier said than done, of course. 

A study published earlier this month warned advertising campaigns to promote responsible alcohol consumption often miss the mark because their attempts to depict the perils of binge-drinking backfire at a psychological level. It said that highlighting the embarrassing consequences of over-indulging – such as being thrown out of a club, having to be carried home, or passing out in a doorway – can just act as a reminder of a fun night out.

The study also said the campaigns display a basic misunderstanding by assuming that young people who get drunk are disapproved of by their peers, whereas in fact stories of "extreme inebriation" often boosted people's reputation.

The research findings underline the deep-seated nature of the problem. But that has not deterred Mr MacAskill from pursuing common sense reforms which can make some difference.

In opposition, Mr MacAskill had already drawn attention to high-strength cider on sale for less than a bottle of water.

And almost as soon as he was in post, he promised new curbs on cut-price alcohol promotions in off-licences and super- markets.

He also wants to charge pubs and clubs an extra levy for late-night licences to help pay for the cost of police dealing with drink-fuelled antisocial behaviour.

He says it is following the principle of "polluter pays" – "The effects of alcohol on our city and town centres is not cost-free and those who profit from it must contribute to addressing it. It's not right that taxpayers pick up the whole of the bill."

Mr MacAskill has pushed for new restrictions on drinks displays in supermarkets to counter the idea that buying alcohol is just like buying "a pint of milk or a packet of tattie scones".

And he has given licensing boards the power to increase fees for liquor licences to cover costs. 

The move prompted an outcry from pubs and off-licences and it is understandable that smaller retailers especially will be worried about a big increase in their overheads. But it is up to local licensing boards to set the charges at realistic yet affordable levels. The principle that the licensing process should meet its own costs rather being subsidised by council taxpayers cannot surely be disputed.

No-one is expecting quick results, but Mr MacAskill is showing a seriousness about tackling the problems associated with alcohol, not as part of some killjoy crusade but out of a recognition of the deep damage being done to individuals and society.
