ALEX SALMOND and his supporters could be forgiven a bit of triumphalism when they met in Aviemore at the weekend.
It was the first conference the SNP had held as the party of government in Scotland - and delegates were reminded of the fact over and over again by speakers. 

After decades of disappointment, the Nationalists had a remarkable victory to celebrateADVERTISEMENTand the partying matched the occasion. 

But now Mr Salmond and his colleagues face the harsh reality of working out how they will pay for the promises they made during the elections in May. 

In less than a fortnight, finance secretary John Swinney will unveil the Scottish Government's detailed spending plans. 

And the row over the "broken promise" of 1000 more police is only a foretaste of the attacks and counter-attacks which will follow his statement. 

The SNP's manifesto was stuffed with expensive pledges, from saving accident and emergency departments to wiping out student debt. 

The £30 billion budget for next year may be twice what Donald Dewar had to spend when the Scottish Parliament was first set up back in 1999, but the year-to-year increase is much lower than in previous years and it will be a struggle for Mr Swinney to fulfil all those promises. 

Ministers have wasted no opportunity to underline what a bad deal they believe Scotland has been handed by Westminster - it was even likened to the kind of settlements handed out 20 years ago by Margaret Thatcher. 

Their complaints have prompted speculation among some that expectations are being deliberately lowered ready for some rabbit to be produced out of a hat. 

But if Mr Swinney has to tell MSPs the Government cannot deliver all its priorities as soon as it hoped, there is no doubt the blame for the situation will be laid firmly at Gordon Brown's door. 

Mr Salmond told delegates at the weekend that the tight spending settlement was a good argument for independence. 

And that was a useful reminder, if it were needed, of what the SNP is about. The First Minister has spelled it out often before and he did so again at Aviemore - the SNP wants to prove its competence in government as a way of persuading the public to have the confidence to opt for independence. 

However, a new study this week suggests they have a big task on their hands. According to the Scottish Social Attitudes Survey, voters are enthusiastic about Mr Salmond as First Minister and accept the SNP is looking after Scottish interests, but support for independence has fallen to its lowest level for ten years at just 23 per cent. 

And despite the upbeat mood at Aviemore, some observers said the tone of the conference was not quite as euphoric as they had expected. 

If that is the case, it could be either because of a realisation there are likely to be tough times ahead as a result of the spending squeeze or perhaps a feeling among some Nationalists that they are still a long way short of their true goal - an independent Scotland. 

After the Yes, Yes vote in the 1997 devolution referendum, the knowledge that a Scottish Parliament was about to become a reality cut little ice with some SNP activists. A staging post to independence it might be, but the fight had to go on. 

Similarly, even the election of an SNP government and having Mr Salmond as First Minister will not dazzle the diehards. 

One delegate, asked by an interviewer how it felt to have an SNP government after all these years, said it was "like a dream" but quickly added: "We're only half way there, of course." 

A senior SNP insider readily admits the party's election victory in May cannot in any way be seen as a vote for independence. 

"We didn't campaign on independence," he says. "We campaigned on becoming the government." 

Now they are there, Mr Salmond's strategy is not just to govern well but to create a different feel to his administration and gradually nudge Scotland towards being a "full nation". 

Already the "Scottish Executive" has assumed the title of "Scottish Government". This week, a senior civil servant was appointed Scotland's ambassador in Washington. 

Mr Salmond has been "standing up for Scotland" - or "picking fights with Westminster" in the opposition version - over issues from secret deals with Libya to the withholding of cash help for farmers over foot-and-mouth. 

And in his conference speech, he quoted research suggesting an independent Scotland would be the third wealthiest country in Europe per head of population. 

The aim, from the SNP's point of view, is to make independence as unthreatening as possible and create a sense of confidence in Scotland that makes going it alone seem a natural choice. 

It is still unlikely there will be a referendum in 2010, as the SNP wants. But Mr Salmond hopes that if and when the time comes for a vote, opting for independence will no longer seem a leap in the dark, more like crossing the road.
