THE governments at Holyrood and Westminster have been skirmishing since the elections six months ago on issues from fishing to Trident.
But now those elections have themselves become the latest political battleground between the SNP and Labour administrations. 

The May 3 poll, which combined Scottish Parliament and local council elections, turned into a fiasco with 140,000 ballot ADVERTISEMENTpapers rejected, thousands of postal ballots arriving too late and the results in many places delayed for hours because of problems with the electronic counting. 

Ron Gould, the international elections expert brought in to review what went wrong, came up with a swathe of recommendations, ranging from a new post of Chief Returning Officer for Scotland to "decoupling" the parliament and local government elections. 

But the one which has been seized on for battle is the proposal that one body should have responsibility for both the Holyrood and council elections. 

At the moment, the Scottish Parliament is in charge of council elections and Westminster of the Scottish Parliament poll. 

Gould says it seems "logical" for the Scottish Government to assume responsibility for both - a suggestion seized on with glee by the SNP, but not so popular with Labour's Des Browne. 

The Scottish Secretary told the House of Commons he was "not persuaded" of the case for such a move, while First Minister Alex Salmond said it was "absurd" Holyrood did not control its own elections. 

Whatever the outcome of this confrontation, politicians in all parties should not be allowed to dodge the damning verdict of the report that they treated voters as "an afterthought". 

Gould found there had been "too much political debate" about the design of the ballot papers. "Months of partisan political discussion wasted valuable time which could otherwise have been used to establish a ballot paper which all voters could easily understand," he said. 

The SNP plays down Gould's criticisms of the political parties, saying parties are expected to be "partisan", but argues ministers are meant to be "above" that and highlights the report's complaint about "a notable level of party self-interest evident in ministerial decision-making". 

Douglas Alexander, Scottish Secretary at the time, has offered an apology for "any actions or omissions on my part which contributed to the problems" - but his critics still want his resignation. 

It was Mr Alexander who decided there would be a single ballot paper for the list and constituency votes - identified by Gould as the main reason for the massive number of rejected ballot papers. He also decided on arranging the ballot paper so people would vote for the list first and the constituency second. 

To be fair, both these moves were recommended by the independent Arbuthnott report and supported by the bigger parties. They were nevertheless seen, even at the time, as politically motivated. 

The smaller parties detected a deliberate attempt to squeeze them out. They had previously picked up a lot of list votes from people who had used their constituency vote for one of the bigger parties. The bigger parties claimed such vote-splitting showed the voters didn't understand the system and thought of the list vote as a "second choice" - but it is just as plausible that voters wanted to ensure the big parties did not have everything their own way and so voted for the Greens, independents and socialists to get a better spectrum of views in parliament. 

Whether it was a direct result of the change or not, the smaller parties and independents did suffer major losses. 

Gould also criticises the SNP's ploy of replacing the party's name with the slogan "Alex Salmond for First Minister" in the list vote and says it could have contributed to the large number of rejected ballots. 

Mr Salmond quips that his father did not name him Alex so he could be first on the ballot paper. But there is a serious point here. Labour MSP George Foulkes obtained figures from the Electoral Commission showing the SNP's tactic was one of the top three complaints they received about the election. The SNP says it has no problem in accepting the proposal to outlaw such slogans in future. 

Mr Salmond says he accepts all the Gould recommendations - and Mr Browne has also moved to indicate he is happy to go back to separate ballot papers for Holyrood's list and constituency votes and allow more time for postal votes to be issued. He seems to accept that Scottish Parliament and council elections should no longer be held on the same day and he said electronic counting would not be used for Holyrood-only elections. 

But perhaps the most important response by politicians to the Gould review would be to recognise their collective guilt in trying to bend the election procedures to their own party political advantage and agree to take more of a back seat in future. 

Gould called for more emphasis to be placed on the expertise of experienced election professionals and a minimising of the role of "political self-interest". 

In plain language, that means the politicians should stop interfering and let officials get on with the job.
