CANDIDATES, campaign organisers, election officials and everyone else who was geared up for an early General Election can relax after Gordon Brown's decision to spare us an unnecessary trip to the polls.
The Prime Minister has signalled he's unlikely to go to the country until 2009, but that doesn't mean elections are off the agenda - especially not when it comes to learning the lessons of the fiasco surrounding the Scottish Parliament and local elecADVERTISEMENTtions earlier this year. 

Canadian international election expert Ron Gould, called in to report on the mess and to outline ways to prevent it happening again, is due to publish his findings later this month. 

His wide-ranging report will focus mainly on the Scottish Parliament elections because that's where most of the problems arose. 

But he is also expected to address some concerns raised in relation to the local polls, including the "alphabet effect" where candidates whose names come early in the alphabet were given an unintended advantage over party colleagues. 

Under STV, voters rank candidates in order of preference. But what seems to happen is voters who want to vote Labour, for example, will scan down the ballot paper till they find the first Labour candidate and place a "1" against his or her name, rather than looking right through the list and perhaps putting another Labour candidate as "1". 

Six senior councillors in Edinburgh who were expected to get re-elected ended up losing their seats while fellow candidates from the same party, but with names earlier in the alphabet, got in. 

This is a recognised side-effect of the system. Solutions put forward include printing half the ballot papers with the names listed in reverse alphabetical order or simply using a random order. But Denis Mollison, emeritus professor of statistics at Heriot-Watt University, argues this merely substitutes random injustice for alphabetical injustice. 

The most elaborate way of countering the alphabet problem is a system used in Tasmania and known as "Robson's rotation", where the ballot paper is printed in as many different versions as there are candidates to give everyone a chance of being first on the list. 

However, Professor Mollison says another answer would be to adjust the STV rules to give voters the right to rank two or more candidates as of equal preference. That would mean a voter wanting to vote Labour, say, but without any preference between two candidates being fielded by the party in a particular ward could mark them both "1". 

Amy Rodger, director of the Electoral Reform Society in Scotland, which campaigns for STV, says equal preference could be an option, but points out there is no alternative to electronic counting where equal preference is allowed, so the "last resort" of counting by hand would not be available. 

Mr Gould - who has been involved in over 100 election observations worldwide - has spent more than three months looking into the problems which arose in the Scottish elections in May, including the delays in sending out postal votes, the difficulties with electronic counting and the 140,000 rejected ballot papers. 

The report is expected to set out options rather than recommend specific solutions, but he has conducted painstaking interviews with politicians, officials and others involved in the events, so his findings will be based on a thorough exploration of the issues. 

There is strong evidence to suggest the biggest problem was the design of the ballot paper and the decision to have one sheet for both the list and constituency candidates. An obvious answer would be to revert to the practice of the two previous Scottish Parliament elections and have two separate ballot papers. 

He may also address the long-running debate about whether the parliament and council elections should be held on the same day, especially now they use completely different voting systems. However, there is not much evidence this caused a lot of problems - and if the council elections were shifted to the "mid-term" of the parliament, the current pattern of Westminster election dates means voters could still face two elections on the same day. 

The report is also expected to consider the powers and responsibilities of returning officers who each reign supreme in their own areas, often making different decisions about the way counts are conducted. 

And it may raise once again the issue of whether delaying the count until the next day would bring any advantages. 

Possibly one of the most controversial areas, however, will be the consideration of how parties should be allowed to describe themselves on the ballot paper. 

The SNP came up with the clever wheeze of using its leader's name on the ballot paper, so voters were offered the chance to put their X not against "Scottish National Party" but against "Alex Salmond for First Minister". 

Not only did this capitalise on Mr Salmond's high voter appeal, it also ensured the Nats were top of the ballot paper in most parts of Scotland. 

Opposition parties will be only too delighted to try to change the rules if Mr Gould makes any criticism of the ploy.
