IT IS less than six months since Scots went to the polls, but if the feverish speculation of the last ten days proves right, they will be heading there again very soon. Another election so soon after the Holyrood one in May carries the risk of not just voter fatigue, but activist fatigue.
Labour politicians north of the Border are divided on whether Gordon Brown should opt for an early election, with Midlothian MP David Hamilton urging him to seize the momentum which has built up in his favour, while Livingston's Jim Devine argues forADVERTISEMENTa delay. 

But one senior Labour insider says: "People are gearing themselves up for an election. They came back from the conference in Bournemouth thinking it's going to happen. In Scotland, the party would probably prefer him to wait because we've just had an election and there is not a great deal of money in the coffers, but he is Prime Minister of the UK and he has to judge it from all sides." 

Despite Labour's defeat in the Scottish Parliament elections at the hands of the SNP, the party is optimistic about its prospects in a Westminster contest. 

Labour chiefs argue voters treat Holyrood and Westminster elections differently and they believe Gordon Brown's good poll ratings will translate into a strong Labour vote in Scotland. 

One source says: "We won't do as badly as people might think. The Nats are obviously on a high, but we will do all right in a general election. People realise when it's Westminster it's about choosing a UK government. And it helps that it's now Gordon Brown leading the party instead of Tony Blair." 

Scottish Nationalists, still basking in their historic victory in May, are eager for an early Westminster poll to capitalise on their popularity. The SNP can be confident about increasing their share of the vote from the 17.7 per cent they polled in 2005. After all, that was a low point for the Nationalists after polling 20 per cent in 2001 and 22 per cent in 1997. 

But because Westminster elections are still first past the post and there are relatively few constituencies where the SNP is lying a close second, a surge in support will not necessarily mean winning many extra seats. 

The party's best hopes are probably Ochil & South Perthshire, where it was just 688 votes behind Labour, and Dundee West, which the SNP won from Labour at the Holyrood election. 

But it also hopes for a good showing in Edinburgh East, where Kenny MacAskill won a surprise victory in May. Nationalists believe their candidate in the seat, former Edinburgh Labour councillor and now Scotsman associate editor George Kerevan, is a "good Edinburgh figure" well placed to build on the support secured by Mr MacAskill. 

The SNP knows it cannot "win" a Westminster election - but the party has its case tailored for a variety of scenarios. If Labour looks certain to win, the SNP will say there is no need to vote Labour to keep the Tories out and Scots should back the Nats. If it seems David Cameron has a chance of victory, the message will be to vote SNP to save Scotland from the Tories. And if the polls suggest a hung parliament, the SNP will say voting for it is the best way to maximise Scotland's influence. 

Whatever Mr Cameron's chances down south, few political insiders see much prospect of the Tories doing well in Scotland. One senior Tory source says the party here views the prospect of an early election with "absolute terror". 

At the moment, the party has just one Scottish MP - and the source sees little likelihood of any immediate gains. "We would definitely get David Mundell back, but, beyond that, I can't see what we would get." 

The party's next target would be Dumfries & Galloway, where former chairman Peter Duncan is the candidate, but Labour's Russell Brown is well entrenched. 

And the SNP-held seats which the Tories will target - Angus and Perth & North Perthshire - are "impossible" because the Nationalists are riding so high in the opinion polls. 

Liberal Democrats talk up their own chances, not least in Edinburgh South, which they have made their top target seat in Scotland after coming within 405 votes of Labour last time. 

But all the other parties agree the Lib Dems are the party most likely to lose out if an election is called now. Their exit from government has left them without any real power or influence in Scotland after eight years sharing the driving seat. 

And Charles Kennedy, who seemed to establish a good rapport with voters in 2005, has been replaced by Sir Ming Campbell. A senior SNP source says: "Labour would do all right - it's the Lib Dems who are likely to come out of it badly. They have gone from being in government not to being the main opposition party or even the second opposition party. They are the third opposition party. You can't fall much further than that." 

With a possible announcement from Gordon Brown imminent, all the parties are rushing to make sure they have candidates in place. The Tories are furthest behind, with selections still to be made in more than 50 of the 59 seats. 

Manifestos are already being prepared. Reluctantly or otherwise, they are now just waiting for the date.

