SORRY is not a word that comes easily to politicians' lips. Normally, it has to be dragged from them after all other excuses have failed - and even then, it's often half-hearted and said grudgingly.
So Wendy Alexander's unsolicited and fulsome apology to the Labour conference at Bournemouth for the party's poor performance in the Scottish Parliament elections came as a surprise - and a bit of an embarrassment. 

"As the new leader and on behalADVERTISEMENTf of the whole Scottish party, I offer an apology for our defeat in last May's Scottish elections," she told the assembled delegates. "For despite our many achievements in government in Scotland, too many felt we had lost touch." 

The picture of Ms Alexander heading south to grovel to the UK party for Scotland's apparent failings does nothing to lay the foundations for the party north of the Border taking on more responsibility for its own affairs, which Ms Alexander is said to want. 

And the very notion of "apologising" for defeat betrays an assumption that there is a natural law which says Labour ought to be in power in Scotland. 

The confessional tone of her comments also clashed with the otherwise upbeat mood at Bournemouth, where Gordon Brown was delivering his first conference speech as leader and where the high poll ratings have fuelled feverish speculation about an early General Election. 

"Why did she feel she had to apologise?" asks one dismayed Scottish Labour insider. "It was unnecessary." 

Ms Alexander did appear to use the apology, however, as a jumping-off point for some veiled and not-so-veiled criticism of the Scottish Executive led by her predecessor Jack McConnell. 

And a Labour MSP argues that the apology drew a line under the election defeat and confirmed the determination to press ahead with change. 

"It's not all that different from what Gordon Brown was doing. He obviously wasn't apologising for Tony Blair, but the whole idea of changing and doing better was a clear subtext to what he said." Ms Alexander's conference appearance came just days after her debut at First Minister's Questions last week, when she tried to put Alex Salmond on the spot over free central heating for pensioners. 

The scheme introduced by the last Scottish Executive has benefited 80,000 pensioners but she claimed Communities Minister Stewart Maxwell had admitted it was now being reviewed, with targeting or means-testing the likely outcome. 

Unfortunately, she could produce no minister's quote to back up her assertion and Mr Salmond said her description of what had been said was "not accurate". The scheme was being reviewed with the purpose of improving it. 

This exchange continued for three more questions, but no further light was shed on the issue. Some judged Ms Alexander to have done reasonably well because she kept her cool and delivered her lines. But she is not going to win any battles with the First Minister if the basis of her questions are flawed. 

Labour later issued a press release saying: "The SNP have a simple question to answer - will the current provision of free central heating to all pensioner households continue, yes or no?" The first thought was that such a blunt formula-tion might have been a good one for Ms Alexander to have used in the chamber. 

The new Labour leader had chosen a topic which Mr Salmond and his advisers almost certainly had not guessed at. It promised to catch them off balance and portray them as attacking one of the past regime's popular achievements, but it didn't come off. 

One Labour MSP defends her, saying: "As a performance it was good and lots of people were impressed by the manner of her questioning. 

"There is a question mark over what Stewart Maxwell said, but it went down quite well at the time." 

Mr McConnell had struggled as leader of the opposition to strike the right note at FMQs, but acting leader Cathy Jamieson delivered some short, sharp and effective points when she stood in before Ms Alexander's formal accession. The new leader still has to prove herself in this part of the job. 

And despite winning general approval for her shadow cabinet, she has run into other personnel problems with the abrupt departure of the party's chief spin doctor Brian Lironi after just six weeks in post. 

He has denied any clash with the leader, but his resignation reminds everyone of Ms Alexander's past reputation as a demanding boss and hard task-mistress, having angry arguments and phoning and e-mailing staff in the middle of the night. 

Insiders insist that the Labour group in the parliament is mostly united behind her and reports of discontent are down to a few who were never going to accept her as leader. 

But Ms Alexander does not seem to be enjoying the same kind of "honeymoon" which Gordon Brown as Prime Minister and Alex Salmond as First Minister have had. 

Instead of rushing south to apologise for the election result, she might have been better advised to concentrate on building good relationships in Scotland.
