MUCH of the comment that followed Wendy Alexander's unveiling of her new shadow cabinet this week focused on the number of women now in Labour's top team. Five out of seven of the posts have gone to females.
It has been pointed out that the line-up bears a striking resemblance to the all-girl group which gathered for a Chinese take-away in the Glasgow flat of Pauline McNeill - now shadow justice secretary - soon after Labour's election defeat in May. 
ADVERTISEMENTThe carry-out confab was interpreted as a meeting to plot Ms Alexander's leadership bid, though those present insisted it was just friends sharing a meal. Innocent or not, it has prompted jibes about a "chop suey cabinet". 

So what is to be made of All Wendy's Women? Despite some of the comments, most of the appointments are seen as sensible. Ms McNeill may be a close ally of the new leader, but she has built up a wealth of experience as convener of one of the Scottish Parliament's justice committees. 

Sarah Boyack's return to Labour's top ranks is seen by many as long overdue. The Edinburgh Central MSP's green credentials make her the natural choice for the environment portfolio. 

Margaret Curran, who established a strong reputation as the communities minister who pushed through antisocial behaviour measures before being shifted to the backroom role of minister for parliamentary business, will have another chance to tackle a high-profile area as shadow health secretary. 

The two men in the team - Iain Gray and Andy Kerr, who split the job of shadowing John Swinney's oversized finance and public services portfolio - are also good appointments. Mr Gray, just returned to Holyrood as MSP for East Lothian and tipped as a possible future leader, has high-level ministerial experience from his last spell in the parliament and also valuable insights from his more recent role as special adviser at the Scotland Office. 

Mr Kerr, who could have challenged for the leadership when Jack McConnell stood down, is seen as one of the party's strongest performers. 

Just outside the shadow cabinet, Jackie Baillie - another former minister and key Alexander ally - has been put in charge of parliamentary business and constitutional affairs and Malcolm Chisholm, the Edinburgh North & Leith MSP who quit the Cabinet last year over Trident, is shadowing Europe, external affairs and culture. 

Altogether, Ms Alexander has found jobs of one kind or another for more than half Labour's parliamentary party, and although the shadow cabinet is female-dominated, overall there are still more men with positions than women. 

One female critic highlights the appointments of former finance minister Tom McCabe as campaign director and Donald Dewar's former spin doctor David Whitton as parliamentary aide to the leader. "These are pretty influential key posts which have gone to men," the critic points out. 

Women who have worked with Ms Alexander over the years, say it is a mistake to view her as feminist eager to get women into positions of power. One activist says: "Right back to her student days, she was never really into the 'women's agenda'. She is sympathetic on specific issues, but she has never been part of the women's network." 

The shadow cabinet appointments, according to this view, should not be seen as a women's takeover so much as a recognition of proven talent. 

"She has drawn on the experience and talents that go away back to the start of the parliament. Wendy, Sarah Boyack and Jackie Baillie were all prominent members of Donald Dewar's government," says the party activist. 

According to women activists, having females in top posts does make a difference to the electorate. "Women voters respond well to women in key positions," one said. "It's very difficult to quantify, but there is a slightly different approach to debates and a slightly different way of managing meetings." 

When it was first elected in 1999, the Scottish Parliament was hailed for its gender balance, with 37 per cent of MSPs being women. Through its system of pairing constituencies during the selection of candidates, Labour managed to achieve 50 per cent. 

Against expectations, female representation rose in 2003 to nearly 40 per cent, but at this year's elections it fell back to just a third. 

Labour is still balanced exactly 50-50 between men and women - but the party's women activists point out that is by accident rather than design, since there was no mechanism to protect the gender balance achieved eight years ago. 

The Lib Dems have the poorest balance - just two women out of 16 MSPs - while the Tories have five out of 17. 

The SNP has seen the biggest decline in gender balance, from 43 per cent in 1999 to 25 per cent now - but, like Labour, it has several women prominent in its leadership. 

There are arguments to be had about different ways of encouraging more women to stand for election - but seeing women at the top of government must be a good incentive.
