OPPOSITION politicians have warned the SNP there is no guarantee it will get its budget through the Scottish Parliament despite the comfortable majority for the £33 billion package when it faced its first hurdle yesterday.

Labour, the Tories and the Greens joined with the SNP to allow the 2009/10 Budget Bill to pass Stage One of the parliamentary process by 107 votes to 16. The Liberal Democrats voted against and independent Margo MacDonald abstained.

Now follows deADVERTISEMENTtailed debate in committee next week, when MSPs can argue for amendments. The final vote takes place on January 28. It is almost certain the budget will be passed. 

The SNP's package does include £230m of accelerated spending for schools, housing and transport designed to help economic recovery. None of the parties wants to be seen to endanger that kind of investment.

Neither do they want to force an election, which could be the ultimate effect of defeating the budget. 

But even if the SNP can be reasonably confident about the end result, the budget process over the next two weeks will be a significant test for both the Government and the opposition. The way they handle the negotiations and how much they are able to get out of them will be a measure of the influence the parties can wield in a parliament where they are all minorities.

Last year, the first time the SNP faced the test of getting its budget through, the package was passed with the backing of the Tories and Margo MacDonald.

The Tories claimed they had secured £114m worth of concessions in return for their support – 500 new police officers over three years, more money for drug rehabilitation and an accelerated scheme of tax relief for small businesses. 

This year the Tories seem equally prepared to do a deal with the Government, but their demands seem low level – a new electronic ward-by-ward monitoring scheme for hospital-acquired infections and a week of outdoor education for all schoolchildren.

Ms MacDonald won the promise of a Capital City Supplement for Edinburgh in return for her vote last year. The SNP believes the delivery of the extra cash – £3.5m – in the new budget should be enough to secure her support again this year, though Ms MacDonald has said she expects some "flexibility".

A Government source responds to that by saying: "There's nothing to stop Margo coming forward and asking for things. She's not backward at coming forward. But she recognises and appreciates this is the first administration that has done anything to recognise Edinburgh's special responsibilities as the Capital."

The Greens – whose abstentions were vital in the narrow 64-62 majority for last year's budget at Stage One – were rewarded with more money to tackle climate change and extra funding for busses.

The votes of the two Green MSPs could prove crucial again this year. And they have had encouraging signals from Mr Swinney in response to their campaign for a major programme of free insulation for households across Scotland.

Green leader Patrick Harvie told the chamber: "There are those who say the environment slips down the agenda in a recession. But when better to stop wasting energy and wasting money?"

Last year, neither the Liberal Democrats nor Labour had talks with the SNP about the budget – perhaps because they were still adjusting to the fact they were no longer in control of the purse-strings.

This year, the Lib Dems did have talks – but they were short-lived because they went in demanding the Scottish Parliament should use its "tartan tax" powers to cut income tax by 2p, a proposal the Government was never going to entertain.

Labour, on the other hand, are continuing talks with the Government, calling for more to be done on apprenticeships and training.

Labour MSPs are keen to avoid a repeat of last year, when they were widely ridiculed for their decision to abstain in the final budget vote despite having had their amendment accepted by the Government.

The party voted with the SNP yesterday, but insisted it only did so to allow the process to continue and is not offering any guarantee of how it will vote in a fortnight's time.

It seems unlikely Labour will go as far as supporting the budget, but will probably want to stop short of blocking it too.

One backbencher says: "It's difficult for us to abstain because we got into such trouble for it last year, but it would probably be the sensible thing to do because it indicates some dissatisfaction but it doesn't stop the money being allocated."

There was a lot of shadow boxing in yesterday's debate, but the politicians of all parties will now need to get down to some hard talking over the next two weeks.

And they will all be judged on how well they come out of it.
