IF Alex Salmond finds time over Christmas to test his memory with one of those quizes of the year, he will find himself looking back at what will seem almost like a lost world.

The halcyon, honeymoon days which the SNP enjoyed for so long have faded now, as they always had to. But so too has the world where Edinburgh's banks were the proud mainstay of the Scottish economy and the news agenda was dominated by the First MiniADVERTISEMENTster demanding Scotland gets a bigger share of the tax take from sky-high oil prices. The economic crisis has dramatically changed the political climate and the fortunes of the key actors.

For most of the year, Gordon Brown seemed to get nothing but bad publicity. Labour was well behind the Tories in the polls; the abolition of the 10p tax band announced by Mr Brown when he was Chancellor came back to bite him as Prime Minister; and when he went on holiday in the summer, he even came under fire for his dress sense. But the recession has given him a new lease of life. Polls have shown an impressive recovery to within a few points of the Tories. And most surveys have found voters trust Mr Brown and Chancellor Alistair Darling to run the economy in these difficult times rather than their Tory opposite numbers.

David Cameron and George Osborne, after a brief period of support for the Government's efforts to save the economy, decided to oppose most of the rescue package and have been left looking at best irrelevant and at worst uncaring. The Tories may still be ahead in the polls, but the likelihood of a comfortable Conservative victory at the next general election has dramatically diminished.

And Liberal Democrat economic spokesman Vince Cable, the man who thought he was too old to run for the party leadership, has now emerged as the most authoritative opposition voice.

Meanwhile, the SNP's dominance of the political scene began to shrink as the economic crisis developed. 

The first half of 2008 saw the ending of tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges; Health Secretary Nicola Sturgeon implementing the first step towards abolishing prescription charges and also announcing a resumption of council house building.

Mr Salmond found opportunities to "stand up for Scotland" by calling for the preservation of Scottish banknotes and the showing of Scotland's World Cup qualifiers on terrestrial television. And economic factors seemed to favour Scotland. In June, the First Minister was demanding a bigger share of the tax take from record oil prices.

All this time, Labour in Scotland was in disarray – bogged down by the row over donations to Wendy Alexander's leadership campaign; ridiculed for abstaining in the budget vote despite getting their amendment through; and confused over their stance on an independence referendum after Ms Alexander's "bring it on" challenge.

When the banking crisis broke, many expected Mr Salmond's knowledge and expertise as a former Royal Bank economist would allow him to turn events to the SNP's advantage. But it did not work out that way.

Mr Salmond launched an attack on "the spivs and speculators" he claimed had brought HBOS to its knees, at the same time insisting he would make "not a word of criticism" of the banks.

But when the banks in general emerged as one of the main villains in the economic drama, his judgement and expertise looked questionable. Opposition politicians also took delight in recalling his previous talk about the "arc of prosperity" – small countries close to Scotland, like Ireland, Iceland and Norway, which he previously hailed as examples Scotland could follow, but most of which now found themselves badly hit by the crisis.

The case for Scotland as an independent country suddenly seemed a little shakier. One MSP says: "

On the broader economy, he can do his best, but it can only be at the margins – there's nothing he can do to affect the big things. People have turned back to Labour because if you're in a storm you don't head out to sea and the unknown, you head into shore and the known harbour."

A senior member of the last administration believes Mr Salmond could still seize the initiative despite the limited levers at his disposal. "If I were him, I would send his finance ministers away to rewrite the budget, cutting out some of the plans which are not absolutely vital and using the money to invest in training, apprenticeships, further and higher education."

The SNP has other problems – not least its troubled flagship policies of the Scottish Futures Trust and the Local Income tax. But for now it's the recession that is dragging it down. One opposition politician says: "Everything has been crowded out because of the economy. And the simple fact is Alex Salmond is not a big player in that."
