The similarities are almost uncanny. An English side apparently going nowhere, insidious whispers of managerial shortcomings, one last chance to scatter the doubters and, finally, the glorious squeezing of the throbbing zit which restores everyone's faith. If world rankings were based solely on two-fingered responses to rising media and public unrest, the English would be No1 indefinitely.

History suggests that Sunday's 34–10 trouncing of France will prove the exception rather than the rule. Last year, following a 33–10 annihilation of Ireland, it seemed Danny Cipriani was the new messiah and Brian Ashton's rebuilding job might finally be underway. Neither proved to be the case. The previous year France were undone at Twickenham by Shane Geraghty and Toby Flood, only for England to stumble in South Africa and during the pool stages of the World Cup. Against all odds they beat Australia in Marseille and reached the final before unravelling against Wales in the opening game of the 2008 Six Nations.

A sense of proportion at Twickenham is imperative. Martin Johnson, to his credit, made no attempt to big up his side's performance, aware that England had been pushing against a frequently unlocked door in the first-half. It seems to be France's duty to make England look world-beaters at least once every two years and they are getting extremely good at it.

"Some of them didn't have the commitment needed in a high-level game," said France's coach Marc Lièvremont yesterday. "Our win over Wales probably went to their heads." It is worth recalling that France still claimed the title in 2007 despite their Twickenham capitulation to Geraghty and co and Ireland, last year's sacrificial lambs in south-west London, are gunning for a grand slam only 12 months later. Opponents seem to react better to chastening defeat than England do to stunning victory.

Perhaps there is a microchip in the English character that only gets activated in times of dire emergency. Could it be there is an underlying streak of arrogance, imagining a job is done when, in reality, the foundations are still incomplete? Neither theory stands up to scrutiny. The fact is that England have no divine right to world domination. There is also a big difference, as Lievremont will tell you, between winning at home and succeeding away. Think back to England's various grand slam mishaps under Clive Woodward when they were mullered at Murrayfield, dismantled in Dublin and plastered in Paris. Good sides win on home soil, great ones do it on enemy territory.

England, in particular, have oscillated between coaches and gameplans since 2003 like impatient moths. Much toil and trouble still bubbles away behind the scenes. On the eve of Sunday's game, Rob Andrew felt compelled to tell Woodward to get back in his box amid fanciful speculation of the knight's return. Lawrence Dallaglio had it about right over the weekend when he questioned whether the wider set-up at Twickenham was geared towards consistent success.

"We can come up with a structure to win the odd game, against the likes of France and Scotland," he said. "But we need to set out our stall to become the best in the world and to do that we need a sea change." England's former fitness coach Dave Reddin felt similarly about the RFU mandarins: "They thought 2003 was evidence of the system working when in fact we won despite the system," he said.

But it is just conceivable it might be different this time. Johnson's England needed to get over a psychological hump, to convince themselves they could replicate their training ground form. "We were itching to get on the field to put things right and prove people wrong, all those people who doubted us," admitted the flanker Tom Croft.

Another thumping declaration of intent against the Scots would then be followed by two Tests this summer against Argentina, one at home and one away. They could easily start next season with four straight wins under their belts, a much better platform from which to introduce talented new players of which they have plenty. Fierce internal rivalry will feed itself, accelerating England's recovery from eighth in the world rankings. Already they are up to seventh, having leapfrogged the unfathomable French. Good times could be on the way back. Although that's what we thought last year.
