Martin Johnson's first Six Nations campaign in charge of England has proved significantly more productive than anyone predicted a fortnight ago. Not only did his team finish with the tournament's highest try count and the second-meanest defensive record but the financial news is also good, the national side's late surge to second in the table having qualified the Rugby Football Union for a healthy £500,000 performance-related bonus from the tournament's commercial pot.

As a result a sense of quiet optimism pervaded the RFU's post-match banquet on Saturday night and Steve Borthwick's end-of-term report to the assembled audience – "It's not where we want to be but it's progress" – was spot on. Confidence, composure, character and consistency are the four pillars on which all top sides are built and England, out of the rubble of the autumn Tests, have shown that something of lasting value is under construction.

A championship featuring three convincing home wins and a one-point defeat away to the eventual grand slam champions should also ensure the English Lions contingent cannot gather in the same telephone box. Phil Vickery, Joe Worsley, Riki Flutey, Andrew Sheridan, Tom Croft and Ugo Monye have all staked significant claims while Delon Armitage, Simon Shaw, Lee Mears, Dylan Hartley, Harry Ellis, Mathew Tait and Toby Flood are not without hope of a call-up next month. "If there are 15 English players away with the Lions there'll be no one happier than me," said Johnson, declining to name individuals but convinced none of his squad would let Ian McGeechan down.

Those wishing to be part of England's ongoing project, however, will have to lay off the pies. A Calcutta Cup success over Scotland which left both sides gasping in the closing stages underlined Johnson's belief that his squad need to get fitter. The issue will be a high priority once the two home-and-away Tests against Argentina this summer are done. "It's not huge percentages but it's something we can improve on," Johnson said, hinting several squad hopefuls would be required to shape up or ship out. "You can't generalise about a squad of 64 players but some guys are up there at a world-class standard and some guys are not. We've got to raise the bar at all levels if we want to get better. The guys are going to have to do the work."

If that sounds a harsh verdict, Johnson is rightly aware England cannot rest on their suddenly acquired laurels against the southern hemisphere's elite. "Are we as good as those guys yet? No, because we're not winning those games," he frowned, conscious two decent home wins will scarcely send the All Blacks ducking behind their sofas. "We weren't good enough in the games we lost, no one's ever denied that. We had to get better but we've started doing that. No one's getting carried away but there's lots of improvement in us."

Monye could find himself held up as an athletic role model after his stunning cover tackle to deny the Scotland wing Thom Evans an 11th-minute try. "I got to the middle of the pitch and thought: 'I'd better put my foot down here'," said Monye matter-of-factly. "He's not the slowest and it's a big confidence boost when you manage to take down someone like him. If he'd scored it could have made it 10–0 and been a totally different game."

The next elite player squad selection in July also looks set to be intriguing with the likes of Jonny Wilkinson, Lewis Moody, Danny Cipriani, Ben Foden, James Simpson-Daniel, Tom Rees, Steffon Armitage and Shane Geraghty having played little or no part these past seven weeks. Johnson, who has emphatically denied tabloid claims of a major bust-up between his attack coach Brian Smith and Cipriani, will soon have to replace senior citizens such as Shaw and Julian White but is understandably encouraged by England's tally of 16 tries, just two short of their aggregate in the past two seasons combined.

They managed three against the Scots, one apiece from the outstanding Monye and Flutey plus a belated calling card from Tait. There could have been more but the Scots offered considerable resistance at times and both Vickery and Ellis were forced off in the first quarter after suffering heavy knocks. Ellis was knocked cold trying to tackle Simon Danielli but recovered sufficiently to do his post-match duty in the hospitality lounges, the modern equivalent of smelling salts.

Scotland, for their part, had to rely again on Chris Paterson's unerring boot and the jury will now retire to consider head coach Frank Hadden's future. The Scottish captain Mike Blair loyally suggested Hadden's players might have "let him down a bit" while the coach himself is convinced fifth place does not accurately reflect his side's ability. "I honestly believe we can win a Six Nations Championship with this group of players with better preparation and a full deck of cards," vowed Hadden. It may sound an improbable claim but, as Johnson will testify, perceptions can change very quickly in this game.

