England's captain, Steve Borthwick, has given this weekend's Calcutta Cup build-up a vigorous stir by accusing Scotland of being "ungracious" in the aftermath of last year's unexpected home win at Murray­field and demanding his side set the record straight with an even more ruthless performance than they produced against a hapless France last Sunday.

Borthwick would not reveal the precise nature of the incidents after Scotland's 15–9 victory in Edinburgh 12 months ago but made it clear England are hungry for revenge. "There are certain things I will not forget which happened after the game," he said. "They made no disguise of rubbing in the fact they beat England. As a proud Englishman, it hurt. This is an old rivalry and I'm desperate we get a win this weekend. They were very, very pleased with their victory. I would like to think after Sunday's game against France we handled that win in a gracious manner. How other teams react is up to them."

It is unusual for modern English captains to reopen old wounds so publicly but last season's encounter, which hastened the end of Brian Ashton's coaching tenure, still rankles with Borthwick. "I'm not going to say exactly what happened but that result last year hurt me and every English supporter. We need to put things right. They won fair and square, they outplayed us on the day and we were poor. It was a low point, without question.

"What I'm determined [to do] is produce a better performance than we did against France and finish this tournament off on a high. There'll be lots coming out of the Scotland camp but the focus is upon us. We need to ensure that kind of performance last year never happens again. No disrespect to the opposition but we must improve and play for 80 minutes."

England are planning to tweak their line-up with Tom Rees set to be recalled in place of Joe Worsley, who suffered a gash to his right thumb last weekend. Rees has only just returned from knee ligament damage but the forwards coach, John Wells, said there are no concerns about the Wasps flanker's form or fitness: "He's only had two full games but we're confident of his ability to play at this level."

Toby Flood's shoulder problem remains an issue and Gloucester's Olly Barkley is among four players who have been asked to remain with the squad. Tim Payne and Ben Foden have also been retained but there is still no recall for Danny Cipriani, withdrawn from last year's game at Murrayfield by Ashton after being photographed leaving a nightclub after midnight on the Wednesday before the match.

Sources at Wasps suggest Cipriani has yet to recover from the serious ankle problem he suffered last May and England's attack coach, Brian Smith, stressed the fly-half will not be recalled until his form demands it. "We're across his ankle situation and we're keeping an eye on him but at the moment we think we've got things sorted out in terms of boys who can get the job done. Anyone who wants to break into the squad is going to have to do it through weight of performance."

Foden, however, is very much in the management's thoughts after a string of fine displays for Northampton. "We see him as a unique talent," acknowledged Smith. "Keeping him here is a signal to him and the rest of the boys in the squad: 'Don't relax, what you did last week is ancient history'. If we think we can just turn up and that's going to be good enough, we're going to get into trouble."

Meanwhile, the former Northampton and England World Cup-winning wing Ben Cohen is set to join Sale from Brive on a two-year deal.
