On Monday morning, Toby Flood thought his Six Nations campaign was over. The shoulder injury which forced the fly-half off against France was still very sore. "I thought there was no chance and I'd be out for a good couple of weeks," said Flood, full of praise for the hard work that has been done by England's medical staff. "I'm really ­surprised and confident of getting involved with the team this weekend."

After 12 months in which England have changed their starting fly-half seven times, his fitness is a bonus for Martin Johnson and his coaching team. By the time Flood departed the scene at Twickenham, England were 29–0 up and on the road to their most gratifying Six Nations win since Danny Cipriani left Ireland clutching at thin air in the last match of the 2008 Six Nations. The Leicester player, who has been named to face Scotland on Saturday, will attempt to hit a tackle bag today. Even if that ends badly, he will have been responsible for one of the more significant snapshots of the championship.

Put yourself in Flood's boots. It is the 23rd minute against France and England are ahead 10–0. From an English lineout, he decides to call virtually the same move which saw Mathew Tait carve open the Irish defence in Dublin a fortnight ­earlier. No matter that the French will have studied the video and will presumably be lying in wait. The way Flood sees it, it is worth another crack. Sure enough, expertly-judged passes from Nick Easter and himself put Mark Cueto clear and Riki Flutey finishes the job. France are done for.

If nothing else, that passage of play showed that Flood, after 25 caps, is not scared to try things and is no slave to the easy option. It is the mindset of a quality player, even if he does still look more of a natural No12 than a No10 at times. "My feeling was that because our first move of the match worked so well, it allowed us to manipulate France and ­create that second try," he said, more than happy to assume the responsibility of making England's attacking game tick. "Sometimes you'll get calls from the touchline but 95% of the time it's down to you trying to think of ways to break down their defence. Sunday's game was hugely enjoyable. It felt like there was no real pressure and we were just out there to express ourselves. That doesn't often ­happen in international rugby. I didn't want to come off but if I'd continued the shoulder would probably have got worse."

A few clap press-ups today will offer a clue as to whether Andy Goode might yet have to step into the breach on Saturday – "Twenty-four hours can make a lot of difference and I think Johnno wants to wait until Friday" – but this is clearly a resilient character who can almost match Jonny Wilkinson's famously obsessive approach to kicking practice.

"I think I owe Jonny a fair bit but even as a kid at school, we'd have double free periods and I'd find myself down at the playing fields, practising my kicking. It was a bit weird because I'm not even sure why I did it. I should have been smoking and drinking but I think it was because I enjoyed it."

There is nothing wrong, either, with Flood's sense of perspective. Even as he was detailing the ­circumstances of the injury to his right AC joint – "It was a comical moment … I saw Thierry Dusautoir ahead of me, went to step him, ended up falling on my arse, struggled to get to my feet, landed on my shoulder and he landed on top of it" – he was quick to stress he had nothing to worry about by comparison with the paralysed former Leicester prop Matt Hampson, who sat in a wheelchair just a few metres away.

The latest example of Hampson's extraordinary spirit is a sponsored walk in May (www.walk4matt.org) which will raise funds for SpecialEffect, a new charity partly dedicated to helping disabled young people unable to move any part of their bodies to operate computers using gaze-controlled technology. Flood's ­fitness ­bulletins, and even the Calcutta Cup itself, suddenly seemed utterly trite.
