Someone was using a well-polished crystal ball when the 2009 Six Nations fixture schedule was compiled. This may not be remembered as the greatest championship in the tournament's long history but it will go down to the final minute of the final game in one of the world's finest venues. Regardless of who hoists the trophy at the Millennium Stadium this evening, the climax has been engineered far better than we have any right to expect.

If you happen to be Irish, this is a day to clutch whatever lucky charms are still available after 61 years of tossing them aside in disgust. Keith Wood has even declared himself genuinely optimistic of a first grand slam since 1948, having spent long enough in the company of Paul O'Connell and Brian O'Driscoll to be aware how desperate they are to embrace their date with destiny.

Declan Kidney, the Irish coach, is a man who enjoys an inspirational quote and the famous words of Franklin Roosevelt – 'The only thing we have to fear is fear itself' – would seem most appropriate. He might also care to pass on the sage advice of Martin Johnson, who knows much about winning and losing grand slam deciders. "You get what you deserve," Johnson told his England players as they contemplated a mid-table finish despite hammering the French. Do Ireland deserve a slam? So far they have mostly eschewed risk and bided their time. It has got them this far but something extra may be required to complete the heist.

All week, you can be sure, Kidney will have played the little mind games at which he is so proficient. Four days before Munster's historic Heineken Cup final win over Biarritz in Cardiff in 2006, Kidney had some speakers placed beside the training pitch at Musgrave Park in Cork and arranged for 'Thunderstruck' by AC/DC and 'Welcome to the Jungle' by Guns n'Roses to be blasted out to give the players a taste of the noise levels awaiting them. Sure enough, they kept their heads amid the tumult far better than the Basques. The Millennium Stadium, too, has been a relentlessly happy hunting ground for Irish sides of all hues. Wales have won only one of their last 11 home games against Ireland, not including a defeat at their temporary Wembley billet in 1999. This is also the same stretch of turf upon which Munster have won not one but two European Cups.

If anything, Munster's pursuit of the Heineken holy grail was even more suffocatingly tense than Ireland's current odyssey and O'Connell and Co did not flinch then. There is no reason, Kidney will stress, for them to do so now with a grand slam at stake. Ireland will probably go initially for a variation on the old Munster model: relentless defence, the boot of Ronan O'Gara and the unquenchable spirit of men who sense this chance may never come again. England's resilient effort in Cardiff will also not have gone unnoticed. Wales, for their part, will not want to give Ireland any lineouts and will aim to keep the ball in play, banking on their fitness to drag the Irish forwards down into an aching last quarter and beyond.

If Wales seemed the best bet at the start, instinct now veers towards the Irish. It comes back to Johnson's home truth: you have to earn your Six Nations titles and Wales, having motored to their own grand slam last year, have started to splutter. The Irish have not been wholly convincing either but they would deserve their rewards, should they win this evening. Forget the inevitable taunts from the south that there is no truly great team in Europe at present. Just as nobody slagged off Hercules for dawdling over his labours, not all Six Nations champions are necessarily world-beaters. It is like comparing apples and pears: the slog through a northern hemisphere winter into spring demands far more than talent alone.

Interestingly, too, both Wales and Ireland have had three away games this year: whoever reaches this year's summit will have scaled Everest the hard way. The Lions may not be able to pick umpteen world-beaters for their tour of South Africa this summer but there will be no shortage of battle-hardened sherpas.

Ireland by a point, roared on by the hoarse ghosts of '48.
