England have taken the precaution of ­adding the Harlequins wing David ­Strettle to their Six Nations squad as cover for Paul Sackey, who remains a slight doubt for next Sunday's home game against France. Ugo Monye and Mathew Tait already offer alternative options if Sackey fails a fitness test on a sore calf but Strettle still has every reason to be grateful after a turbulent 21 months.

The 25-year-old from Cheshire has ­broken down three times with a recurring foot problem which forced him out of the 2007 World Cup and has so far limited him to 13 minutes in the past two Six Nations. He also suffered serious food poisoning on tour in South Africa in 2007 and acute embarrassment last ­summer when he became the subject of kiss-and-tell allegations in New Zealand. He was subsequently left out of the senior EPS squad and only returned to the Quins' first team following his most recent metatarsal injury at the end of January.

England are not due to announce their starting line-up until tomorrow but are expected to confirm a 22-man squad later today for a game of considerable significance. While Leicester's Louis Deacon has also been summoned as squad cover and the Bath-bound prop David Wilson invited along to bolster the front-row roster in training, the focus remains on the squad's collective ability to stem the damaging flow of sin-binnings that has undermined their development under Martin Johnson.

The issue, inevitably, was top of the agenda at the squad's three-day get-together near Leeds last week when even the number of shuttle runs was ­specifically chosen to highlight the team's unacceptable penalty count. "We related the number of repetitions to how many penalties were given away in the last game," confirmed John Wells, the forwards coach. Given England conceded 18 penalties and free-kicks, it is a minor miracle they finished before nightfall. On closer analysis, however, England remain adamant that only "four or five" of the penalties conceded in Dublin were unacceptable. The majority were in the so-called "grey area" around the breakdown and Wells believes the problem can be fixed against the French to the ­satisfaction of the Australian referee Stuart Dickinson, who, as the video official, ruled out Mark Cueto's 'try' during the 2007 World Cup final. It is England's belief that Dickinson will seek to adhere to the latest trend and favour the team which shows the most attacking intent.

They are also drawing consolation from the fact they have yet to concede a try in the current championship when they have had 15 men on the field. "A win would help the atmosphere, but there's no doubt that as a group of players we've progressed," insisted Wells. "That hasn't shown in terms of results which is frustrating, but I think we're going in the right direction. We might soon be doing enough in other areas to ensure that penalties do not have a massive bearing on the end result."

The coaching staff also brushed aside claims by the former England centre Will Greenwood that Wasps' Danny Cipriani is not being picked because he is unpopular with some of his team-mates. "I've played with and against plenty of players I don't like but it's certainly never crept into ­selection," insisted Graham Rowntree, England's scrummaging coach.
