Every inch has to be earned in the increasingly grim struggle to qualify for the sharp end of this season's Premiership campaign. It is now seven games in succession since Wasps were beaten in High Wycombe yet they were still required to tough it out yesterday merely to remain in ninth place in the table. If they do somehow emerge clutching a European place in May, it will have a lot to do with bloody-minded defensive efforts like this.

If the odds are still against the defending champions making the top four – they are currently 14 points adrift with seven games left – they may just look back on this week as a subtle turning point. While re-signing a dozen players was clearly a welcome plus, so was the intervention of the television match official who took three minutes to confirm the home prop Pat Barnard's 54th-minute try-scoring dive into the left corner. On such microscopic, slow-motion margins can entire seasons turn.

Having lost at Worcester last weekend via a last-ditch drop-goal, Wasps were disinclined to enter into a lengthy philosophical debate as to whether a decision which requires such lengthy analysis can possibly be clear cut. There was plenty of doubt in the London Irish dressing room, however, with the head coach, Toby Booth, intending to look "very closely" at the footage and indicating he would be straight on the phone to the Rugby Football Union's referee manager, Ed Morrison, if the evidence was not clear. Booth thought it revealing that none of the Wasps side retreated back to their own half while they awaited the interminable verdict.

On the balance of play, though, Wasps just about deserved to avenge their convincing defeat by the same opponents on the opening day of the season at Twickenham. Turning around at half-time to face a strong wind with a relatively modest 13-6 lead, they were required to dig in defensively for lengthy periods, particularly after a mediocre game descended into the twilight zone of uncontested scrums. Wasps had scrummaged superbly, with Barnard, hooker Rob Webber, Simon Shaw and the perennially unsung John Hart all contributing selflessly. Deprived of that platform following injuries to Tonga Lea'aetoa and Richard Skuse, it was a very different story as Adam Thompstone skinned Tom Voyce wide on the right to set up a tense last 12 minutes.

Irish, for their part, were left to rue a sixth Premiership game without a win and are starting to look anxiously over their shoulders as opposed to confidently ahead. At their best they generate plentiful quick ball and are both resourceful and sharp at the set-piece, but, as Booth readily acknowledged that was not the case this time. The absence of, among others, Bob Casey, Nick Kennedy, David Paice, Faan Rautenbach, Peter Hewat and Delon Armitage is increasingly costing them dear, as did one or two of French referee Romain Poite's interpretations at the breakdown. "Indifferent" was Booth's carefully worded view but the needless 12th-minute sin-binning of Declan Danaher for impeding Josh Lewsey scarcely helped either.

Even before Danaher's departure Barnard and Co were already applying the squeeze up front and earned their side a penalty try when the Irish pack splintered close to the line. Danny Cipriani was also more reliable with the boot than Shane Geraghty, sliding over a conversion and three penalties in an otherwise subdued performance. It may have been enough to impress the watching England kicking coach Jon Callard but, given the absence of the rest of the management, an imminent restoration to the hub of the national team against France next Sunday looks highly unlikely.

Wasps, in that event, will be less than broken-hearted as this should ensure Cipriani's availability for their league game at Gloucester 24 hours earlier. They also have games against bottom-placed Bristol to come but, as their director of rugby, Ian McGeechan, admits, there can be no margin of error from now on. "We've got to keep performing, we know that," said McGeechan. "I thought that was a big display from the pack. It took a lot out of what Irish were expecting to do with the wind at their backs."

Two league defeats since November, though, is not a bad statistic to brandish as the field enters the long final straight. Wasps, incidentally, reckoned this was the seventh time this season that opponents have gone to uncontested scrums against them. Maybe they, and the frequently injured Barnard, were owed a bit of luck.


