It is increasingly likely that this Six Nations title will be won by a hunched bloke sitting in the stand, eyes trained on a monitor. More than ever we live in an age where prevention is nine-tenths of the law and defence is king of the road. Last year, Wales won a grand slam not so much because they played their opponents off the park, but because they stopped them crossing their try-line. Full stop. Shaun Edwards's mean machine coughed up only two tries in five matches and it made all the difference.

This season is shaping up similarly. The most striking memory of Paris, at least to the television viewer, was the blue midfield blitz that gave Wales no room whatsoever on the few occasions they escaped the clutches of an outstanding French back row.

Croke Park? We all know what a stifling occasion that was, with the honourable exceptions of Brian O'Driscoll's brave lunge beneath the radar and Delon Armitage's gather of Andy Goode's rolling chip.

Italy have managed only one try so far this tournament, in the form of Mirco Bergamasco's consolation effort against England, who are yet to concede a try with 15 men on the field. It is tight out there, too damn tight.

Is this something to be concerned about? Tries, after all, are not the be-all and end-all of a good game of rugby. You might as well claim that centuries are the definitive indicator of a wonderful cricket series (try telling that to the England bowlers attempting to chisel out Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Brendon Nash on a flat, bland Trinidadian pavement). There is a lot more to winning a major Test match than a couple of flashy sidesteps and a swallow dive between the posts.

And yet. Listening to Mike Ford, England's defence guru, on Monday, the alarm bells began to ring. "I pretty much know how every team is going to play," shrugged Ford, asked if the French posed a remotely predictable threat. Suddenly the veil fell away; there is nothing new under the wintry sun in Europe because the defensive mafia know each other's little quirks better than most people know their marital partners.

Mike used to play at Wigan with Shaun; Mike used to coach the Irish defence, as did Graham (Steadman) who now performs a similar role for the Scots. Dave (Ellis) knows precisely what the others are up to because he was reared in the same narrow league corridor in northern England where Phil Larder, the daddy of them all, founded the dynasty. This weekend will pit Mike against Dave for the fourth time inside 19 months. Incestuous is not the word.

If you also factor in some coaches' continued suspicion of the International Board's "protocols" around the breakdown, and it can take just one mean-spirited team and soft underfoot conditions to squeeze the life out of even the best-intentioned. Space disappears faster than a top banker's reputation. England have had plenty of flak following three less-than-dazzling games, but it has not been entirely their fault (yellow cards excepted).

As Martin Johnson sees it, the equation is perfectly simple: to be overly proactive on the big occasion is to court a wholly unacceptable degree of risk, particularly if your kicking game is below par. Ireland, for their part, were clever against England in the sense that they mostly waited for the visitors to shoot themselves in the foot. Then they waited some more. And some more. In the end, their patience was duly rewarded.

I could be wrong and this Sunday's England-France game could be a cracker. But you look at the no-nonsense, experienced players recalled by Marc Lièvremont and remind yourself of England's "give-em-nowt" creed since they decided to stop trying, as they did in the autumn, to run before they could walk. You look at France's patchy record at Twickenham in the Noughties and suspect they might be tempted, as Ireland were, to play a physical waiting game. And then you look at the Six Nations stats, which have already revealed a sharp rise in tries stemming from turnovers or kicks (22% and 20% respectively in 2008 as opposed to 12% and 15% in 2007) before this championship.

You look again at Bastareaud and Traille and Malzieu and Tindall and Worsley and wonder whether subtlety is not so much a lost art as an inevitable casualty of circumstance. And you remind yourself just how often Jonny Wilkinson trumped the French in achingly tight contests and how much England were helped in the World Cup by the favourable bounce that yielded Josh Lewsey's early try in the semi-final. The side that kicks its goals and keeps its try-line intact will surely prevail. Anything else, thanks to Mike, Dave and the boys, is a bonus.

