Sale guaranteed themselves Heineken Cup rugby next season and maintained their slim hopes of a place in the Premiership play-offs with a powerful bonus-point win on a night which did little to resolve the increasingly tangled end-of-season plot. Quins may still lie in second place but they now have to win at home to Newcastle next Saturday to be sure of being involved in the knock-out stages.

The Sharks also need to finish with a flourish against Northampton and hope the sides above them stumble on the final weekend in the closest run-in since the Premiership's inception. They frequently struggled for rhythm against a determined Quins defence but second-half tries from Sébastien Chabal and replacements Rudi Keil and Richard Wigglesworth eventually rewarded the groundwork of their forwards who had earlier forced the season's hardest-earned penalty try after nine successive close-range scrums.

Of the Lions contenders on view, the most impressive were Andrew Sheridan, who enjoyed the better of his front-row tussle with the Irish-qualified Mike Ross, and man-of-the-match Jason White. After just two wins in the Sharks' previous eight league games, however, the new director of rugby Kingsley Jones had more pressing priorities with the club at something of a crossroads. Philippe Saint-Andre, Chabal, Sebastien Bruno and Juan Fernandez Lobbe will all take some replacing and, despite the imminent installation of Jason Robinson as head coach, there is uncertainty in the Stockport air. They needed this result badly, regardless of Quins' status as the meanest defensive unit in the competition.

The evening had begun inauspiciously for Quins on several fronts. They could have done without the late withdrawal of Ugo Monye, who tweaked a muscle in the warm-up, and there may yet be off-field trouble ahead following the decision of the Heineken Cup organisers to launch an inquiry into the blood substitution of Tom Williams in their losing quarter-final against Leinster last Sunday.

European Rugby Cup Ltd issued a statement confirming that an investigation was formally under way into the circumstances surrounding the return to the field of All Black fly-half Nick Evans after Williams was caught on television winking to a colleague as he departed, ostensibly bleeding from his mouth.

Had Evans not missed a potentially match-winning drop-goal in the last minute it would have provoked a major post-match row and ERC have now asked disciplinary officer Roger O'Connor to gather statements from match officials and players of both teams in addition to reviewing video footage of the game.

The worst-case scenario, if an allegation of sharp practice were to be proven, would be a suspension from European competition but Quins were more concerned last night with safeguarding their domestic aspirations. In the absence of Evans and Chris Malone, both injured and out for the season, they entrusted the No10 jersey to Fijian Waisea Luveniyali, who did not inspire immediate confidence on his first league start of the season. His first touch resulted in a knock-on and two of his first three penalty attempts, despite much careful deliberation, never remotely looked like troubling the scorers.

A further reshuffle was soon required when David Strettle limped off with an injured right ankle, to be replaced on the wing by England's scrum-half Danny Care. In the circumstances the early sin-binning of the home side's Spanish winger Oriol Ripol for ball-killing was a blessing and a simple penalty for a relieved Luveniyali gave the Sharks some food for thought on a clear, calm evening.

Even Chabal, back after a six-game injury absence, could find no early holes in a visiting defence which, by rights, should have been leg-weary just five days on from the draining Leinster encounter. It took an age but, having binned the visiting tighthead Ross and awarded five penalties to an increasingly frustrated Sale, referee Wayne Barnes finally lost patience and awarded a penalty try, converted by Hodgson, which nudged the home side into a 7-3 interval lead.

A close-range score from Chabal, also converted by Hodgson, widened the gap two minutes after the restart to leave Quins, despite their best endeavours, playing catch-up. The redeployment of Care at fly-half gave his side more attacking options but Keil's eye-catching midfield break in the 63rd minute effectively sealed their fate.

