England's preference for gnarled experience over 20-something athleticism has reached its logical conclusion with the recall of the 35-year-old Simon Shaw to the team to face France this weekend. The 6'8" tall Wasps lock will become the second oldest lock forward to wear the red rose in his country's history as his former team-mate Martin Johnson endeavours to ensure England pull their full weight against an ominously beefed-up French pack on Sunday.

The estimable Shaw has been overlooked too often since his first senior England tour in 1994, not least during Johnson's playing career, to be regarded as lucky to make his first start in 12 months but the man he replaces, Nick Kennedy, must be privately aghast. On the cards of most ringside observers, Kennedy has outperformed the captain Steve ­Borthwick in this Six Nations campaign, yet the ­manager has remained faithful to his ­skipper for a game which will define ­England's ­championship. "Steve's our captain so I didn't consider that," shrugged Johnson, asked if he had contemplated dropping Borthwick. "He's done, and is doing, a tremendous job for us, sometimes in very difficult circumstances."

Never let it be said loyalty is non-existent in modern professional sport.It could also be argued that Shaw should have been ushered back into the boiler-room long ago as England, in the absence of the injured Tom Palmer, soldiered on with a Borthwick-Kennedy pairing which felt too samey from the start. "Simon's a big strong man and he'll play that role for us," acknowledged Johnson, not exactly a stranger to the subject. "It is not who is the better player, they are different types of second rows."

This renewed desire for balance is similarly good news for Leicester's Tom Croft, who has finally won back his place on the blind-side flank from James Haskell. Croft is a valuable line-out option as well as a marauding presence in the loose and England will need both those qualities against the French. If it is harsh on the powerful Haskell, among England's better players this season, it is also recognition for Croft's outstanding recent club form.

The only other change to the starting line-up is on the wing where Paul Sackey's omission is not entirely down to his recent calf strain. Johnson made clear the management's belief that the Wasps' winger had fallen below the high standards he has set over the past two seasons – "We feel Paul's not been quite on his game" – and has opted instead for Harlequins' Ugo Monye, with Mark Cueto moving to his preferred right wing.

Given the size of Julien Malzieu, the jumbo-sized French winger, it will be the definitive test of Monye's defensive qualities and the bigger picture would seem to be weighing heavily on Johnson's mind. Kennedy is hardly small but he lacks Shaw's ball-carrying clout and scrummaging ballast which, ironically, helped Wasps outmuscle the former's London Irish team-mates in High Wycombe last Sunday. As France will also recall from the World Cup, an English pack with Shaw at the heart of it is not a unit to be treated lightly.

The French, furthermore, have lost to England in each of the past two Six Nations seasons, not to mention the last two World Cups, and will thus cross the Channel with no shortage of psychological baggage. It is hard to believe, but true, that their biggest win at Twickenham remains their first at the ground in 1951 when Jean Prat famously engineered an 11–3 victory on a wet day when the hosts were, at one stage, reduced to just six forwards by injuries.

These days, of course, substitutes are permitted but England are finding it even harder to keep 15 men on the field. They stopped just short yesterday of handing out team-sheets printed on yellow paper but summoned another Premiership referee, Andrew Small, to monitor their training-ground work following an intensive session of remedial work with Wayne Barnes last week.

Johnson has once again urged his players not to "chase lost causes" at the breakdown and risk antagonising the Australian referee Stuart Dickinson. "I've told them they can't feel they're getting a raw deal and that we're the ones causing the problems," said Johnson. England, in short, are clean out of excuses.
