Captaining a losing England team is a thankless task, as Steve Borthwick and Andrew Strauss are both keenly aware. In Borthwick's case, a big, powerful French team is bound for Twickenham this weekend seeking to inflict their hosts' third Six Nations defeat in four games and the 2011 Rugby World Cup match schedule announced yesterday also offered scant respite for a team ranked eighth in the world.

An opening pool encounter with Argentina in Christchurch, as Martin Johnson conceded, will revive uncomfortable memories of the Pumas' first-night victory over France in 2007 and allows little margin for error. "The first game will be huge," muttered Johnson,, briefly allowing himself the luxury of looking beyond Sunday's Anglo-French collision. "We'll be straight into it with a very tough game. We'll have to make sure our preparation and warm-up games are right."

Barely 20 minutes later, however, Borthwick acknowledged that England may have not got their preparations right for this season's fixtures. England have been given 10 yellow cards in their last four games and the skipper's admirably honest verdict is that the answer lies close to home.

"Perhaps we got our preparations wrong," said Borthwick, suggesting too much training-ground attention had been paid to competing at the breakdown without sufficient emphasis on the need to be selective as well. "Ultimately it counts for a huge amount and perhaps we've got that wrong at times. We've worked very hard on being competitive but that needs to be coupled with good decision-making."

It is a considerable admission given England are poised to play their eighth game under Johnson's stewardship. Finally, though, the penny appears to have dropped that playing a quarter of every game with 14 men is not a recipe for success and the team have reverted to a system favoured by Clive Woodward's England when Matt Dawson, the scrum-half, would shout "dead" to warn team-mates against conceding penalties.

"Let's just say there has been an emphasis put on certain calls," said Borthwick, unwilling to give away precise details in order to keep the French guessing. "It is something we need to fix."

It also went without saying that Borthwick also needs a good game on Sunday to silence his critics over his captaincy. He has received some support from Lawrence Dallaglio, who believes now is not the time to wield the axe, but not everyone feels the same way. "I know the view of me as a captain is inextricably linked to the results of the team but that's reality," Borthwick said. "It has its challenges but it's a huge honour."

His chances of still being at the helm when England set off for the 2011 World Cup, however, remain uncertain.
