England will announce at least one change today to their line-up to face France following Paul Sackey's failure to recover from the calf problem he suffered against Ireland last month. Ugo Monye or Mathew Tait will now start on the wing but neither Danny Cipriani nor Ben Foden will be involved at Twickenham on Sunday.

Cipriani and Foden were among 13 players sent back to their clubs last night, with Gloucester's Luke Narraway and David Strettle also among the fringe candidates released. It signals Martin Johnson's intention to stick with the core of the XV which has started the previous three games, although Leicester's Tom Croft is pushing hard for a back-row berth.

Danny Care, as expected, has retained his place in the 22 despite his much-publicised yellow card in Dublin but there will be no further Six Nations action for Shane Geraghty. The London Irish fly-half has been ruled out of the rest of the campaign after breaking a bone in his hand playing against Wasps on Sunday. Olly Barkley trained with the squad in Bagshot yesterday but has not made the matchday 22.

Gordon D'Arcy has been reunited with his centre partner Brian O'Driscoll with Ireland's coach Declan Kidney altering his line-up for the first time in this year's Six Nations. Peter Stringer is recalled at scrum-half for the meeting with Scotland at Murrayfield and Ulster's hooker Rory Best and Denis Leamy of Munster have also been promoted to the pack. Tomas O'Leary, Jerry Flannery and Jamie Heaslip drop to the bench. Munster's prop John Hayes will make his 93rd appearance, edging him past Mal O'Kelly as Ireland's most capped player.

D'Arcy replaces Paddy Wallace, another who must settle for a place among the substitutes. It will be the 29-year-old's first Ireland start since breaking his arm against Italy last year. O'Driscoll said: "It's tough on Paddy because he's played some good games but Gordon brings a different element. He's worked hard to get back in after being injured for so long and has shown huge patience."

Chris Paterson has been recalled at full-back for Scotland in place of Edinburgh team-mate Hugo Southwell. Alasdair Dickinson replaces loose-head Allan Jacobsen, who underwent shoulder surgery last week. Scotland's coach Frank Hadden has delayed a decision on locks Jim Hamilton and Nathan Hines who are recovering from injuries.

Wales were forced to make a change yesterday for their meeting with Italy in Rome when their scrum-half Dwayne Peel was ruled out for a month after suffering a hamstring tear playing for Sale on Sunday. He has been replaced by Mike Phillips while the London Irish scrum-half Warren Fury is promoted to the bench.
