Today is Phil Vickery's 33rd birthday, but call him "Ageing Bull" at your own risk. Only a fool would dismiss the desire of a born warrior with the increasingly appropriate inscription – "I'll fight you to the finish" – tattooed in Chinese symbols on his left shoulder. Nor is there any disputing his softly-spoken passion – "Test matches are about exhaustion, full-blooded commitment, nothing left in the tank" – as he readies himself for another routinely epic journey to the depths of his patriotic soul. After 71 caps in the front row, few are better equipped to judge.

Vickery, too, is perfectly placed to reflect on the enigma that is English rugby. When the 18-and-a-half-stone tighthead embarked on his Test career at the age of 21, it was France who were known for their indiscipline and England for their sang-froid. No longer. English players have glimpsed more yellow in the past four games than a banana salesman at Carrow Road. Ten sin-binnings in four games take some explaining, particularly as Vickery was among the offenders in Dublin. Birthday cards today, yellow cards tomorrow? A guaranteed red letter day for France would surely follow.

So what have England been doing about it? By all accounts, the management's "naughty boy nets" in Yorkshire last week had a genuine edge. Vickery, like everyone else, has been reminded of the need for greater vigilance: "We sat down and went through all the whys and wherefores, but the problem is, we don't just give one penalty away here and there. It was two or three in a row in the same area. It makes it easy for referees to give a yellow card," Vickery said.

Does he fear England now have a reputation that will be hard to shift? "In fairness, with mine, I couldn't get out from where I was. But for us it's about the whole package. It's not just about discipline. Penalties weren't the only reason we lost to Wales and Ireland. We can't go into this weekend saying, 'If we only give away eight or nine penalties we're going to win'. It doesn't work that way. We've got to up the ante against France because we're playing against a pretty dangerous animal."

It is sunny out on the terrace at Pennyhill Park as he talks, but nothing shines in the dark, hostile places were Vickery has uncomplainingly stuck his head since his earliest days at Bude and Redruth. Ever since his first encounter with France in 2000, neither side has taken a backward step and playing with the now-retired Raphael Ibanez and Serge Betsen at Wasps has merely increased his sense of respect.

"When you play the French teams, whether it's Heineken Cup or internationals, you always know you've had a true test. I think you'll have two teams this weekend who are going to go for it."

Tomorrow, though, is a case of deja vu with a twist. Vickery is among those who sense Marc Lièvremont's France are reverting to the sort of team he knew as a youth. "What the French team have done, for me, is to go back to what they're very good at. That performance against Wales will give them a big boost."

Which leaves England, in Vickery's eyes, no option but to dig deep tomorrow, not least for Johnson's sake. "I feel for Martin because I think he's done a lot of good things with the team and his backroom staff. We've just got to respond. Everyone is working hard but, ultimately, we've got to produce it on the field.

"It's not going to be an overnight success because there are too many bloody good teams around, but I firmly believe this group of guys will get us back up there."

Ask any of his squad-mates and they will similarly tell you there is no one they would rather go into battle with. Vickery remains the conscience of the team and would probably still be captain if Brian Ashton were still in charge. England have had plenty of fine props, but never one with a bigger heart or, despite three back operations, more staying power.

"When you're older than Stonehenge you've got to be careful how you look after yourself," says his Wasps team-mate Joe Worsley, who watches Vickery and Simon Shaw at work daily. "When you know how they're lifting, how they're sprinting, how their fitness is, you can gauge how well they're going to do. When you reach that sort of age, performance is mostly down to those kind of factors."

Vickery, though, prefers to view himself as mostly a lucky sod. Two World Cup finals, the national captaincy, a happy family life, a successful clothing business... none of it seemed feasible to the teenage herdsman on the Cornwall-Devon border who remains a qualified cattle inseminator. A lot of people thought Wasps were taking a chance when they signed him as "damaged goods" from Gloucester three years ago; in fact, it has been the remaking of him.

"I've got no intentions of wanting to stop playing. I'll stop one day, I suppose, but rugby players are pretty lucky people. I still love the game as much as I ever did. You speak to guys like Graham Rowntree and say, 'How do you know when it's time to finish?' They just say, 'Believe me, you'll know.' I just to try to enjoy it, work hard and get through it, even when things aren't going well."

His unflinching approach also looks set to earn him another Lions tour this summer, and the two-year suspension dished out to Matt Stevens has clearly raised his stock as far as England are concerned. Loyally, he prefers to discuss the "nice group" of promising young props such as Davie Wilson – "a great lad with a great attitude" – Jack Forster and Alex Corbisiero, but until he receives a tap on the shoulder he will keep soldiering on.

"I shall be here feeling pretty miserable and nervous," he says simply, asked how he intends to occupy his eve-of-game hours. England should cherish their ever-honest birthday boy while they still can.
