Today will be Martin Johnson's seventh Test as England's hands-on manager and may just tell him more about his players than the previous six combined. Not since Johnson was jabbing his index finger and refusing to budge during the Carpetgate argument prior to the grand slam triumph of 2003 has an English side won a Six Nations game in Dublin. Even if that sequence continues, their master and commander is seeking similar bloody-mindedness once the pre-game formalities conclude this evening.

Johnson is wholly unconcerned about sepia-tinted diplomatic incidents but fully recognises that another rainbow-coloured blur of red rose indiscipline, yellow cards, green-shirted glee and post-match blues will undermine his personal belief that English rugby is now stirring again. If, on the other hand, the visitors derail Ireland's rising title ambitions it will be difficult to dispute his assertion that the battered sweet chariot is finally back on track.

Much will hinge, as ever, on England's players keeping their wits about them more successfully than they did in the corresponding fixture at Croke Park two years ago, while also persuading the South African referee Craig Joubert they are loitering with purely innocent intent at the breakdown. Should the penalty count spiral out of control yet again, Johnson's face will turn seven shades of purple. "If we give Ronan O'Gara seven kicks at goal we're going to struggle to win," acknowledged the former World Cup captain.

Equally, though, England cannot approach the breakdown in the manner of nervous third-formers. The manager enjoyed a perfectly amicable pre-game meeting with Joubert but can hardly cry foul if his players fail to heed the lessons of recent weeks. "They can't back off," admitted Johnson, keenly aware Ireland have a load of try-scoring weapons at their disposal given plentiful quick ball. "The referee has indicated he'll come and referee what's in front of him.

"I do feel the whole group is coming together on and off the field," insisted Johnson yesterday, holding court beneath a huge chandelier at the squad's plush southside hotel. "We want to be right in it with 10 minutes to go and then it'll come down to who's got the nerve."

Ireland, even so, must still be favourites to edge another relentlessly physical contest by a hard-earned margin of six or seven points. Losing to England is not something any Irish player wants on his CV and Declan Kidney has been quietly pushing that psychological button. He will also emphasise that if his side do what they did against France and limit their opponents to only two straight-arm penalties in 80 minutes it will force England to play an all-court game for which they are not ideally equipped.
