England will fly out to Dublin today amid increasing tension between the Rugby Football Union and players who opt to sign for French clubs. While the RFU's management board has stopped short of refusing to pick French-based players, senior Twickenham officials issued the sternest of edicts yesterday, warning that players based abroad will not be included in future England squads if they fail to guarantee their availability for all national sessions and summer tours.

Conspiracy theorists may even regard Martin Johnson's omission of Brive's Andy Goode in favour of Leicester's Toby Flood at fly-half for Saturday's pivotal Six Nations encounter at Croke Park as proof the cold-shoulder treatment has started. Coincidence or not, the RFU's public stance is unequivocal: the management board is "unanimous" that the best interests of the England team can be served only by retaining the leading players in the Guinness Premiership. No leeway, at least in theory, will be given to players who decide to call France's Top 14 home.

A degree of sabre-rattling is clearly involved in an attempt to retain any waverers but the jaw-jutting RFU stance runs the risk of irritating the leading French clubs, not least the RFU's insistence that all England players be available for next year's summer tour. This has potential implications for James Haskell and Tom Palmer, the two Wasps forwards who are bound for Stade Français at the end of the season. Stade's entire raison d'être is to win Le Championnat, whose final this year is on 6 June. If England refuse to be flexible should Stade reach the 2010 final, there is likely to be a major row. Haskell's representatives, however, said last night that the his move to Paris was still on.

Also tucked away in the detail of yesterday's statement is an admission that the RFU may yet have to fall back on International Board regulations if its gunboat diplomacy fails to impress the French. Johnson "will retain the right to select any players playing overseas under the terms of the IRB regulations on player release" which is Goode's current position. The stand-off, however, was required to return to his club last week while Flood remained available at the squad's base in Bagshot. It will not be the last time a home-based player gets the nod over a dismayed ex-pat. Brive, who are due to add Riki Flutey to a cosmopolitan cast which already includes Goode, Ben Cohen and Steve Thompson, have promised their full co-operation but even their English chief executive, Simon Gillham, may swallow hard when he studies the full list of RFU demands.

England yesterday issued nine protocols to players who wish to play abroad. If a player wants to be included in the senior squad – or, crucially, remain in it – his club must agree to release him for all training and preparation days, including the 13 days prior to the start of the autumn Tests and the Six Nations and the two fallow weekends during the Six Nations. The player must also sit out two further weekends in October and December-January, be restricted to a maximum of 32 games per year, fulfil all medical protocols and enjoy a minimum 10-week off-season. If Haskell goes on this summer's Lions tour that would leave Stade unable to pick him until late September. The current French domestic season started on 26 August.

It would have been simpler had the RFU made a pre-emptive statement months ago. That they have done so now betrays the genuine concern within Twickenham. The saga overshadowed Flood's selection, the seventh change England have made at fly-half in their last 10 Tests.

