There is a surprising amount about Harry Ellis that people don't know. They tend to see only a combative, occasionally over-eager scrum-half and forget that players are shaped by fate as much as talent. They were not around on the dark Saturday night in October 2007 when Ellis found the idea of England playing a World Cup final without him so painful he felt unable to watch and opted to wander the streets of Leicester instead. 

Nor were they present when England's players paid a visit to the spinal cord unit at the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital in Stanmore last week. Had they been they would have appreciated that Ellis, at 26, is a more rounded, thoughtful character these days.

On the eve of a huge Six Nations contest, both personally and collectively, there is an increased maturity about the visiting number nine which even he would once have thought improbable. Once upon a time Ellis's desire to beat Ireland at Croke Park would have eclipsed any other sentiment but no longer. He can still recall the raw edge of humiliation he felt on the same glistening stretch of Dublin turf two years ago when Brian Ashton's side were thrashed 43-13, but it is a chance meeting with one of the Stanmore patients which has repeatedly stirred him during the tense, fretful days prior to tonight's reunion.

"I was just chatting to one of the guys there called Matt," recalls Ellis, whose close friendship with another Matt, the paralysed former Leicester prop Matt Hampson, made the experience no less humbling. "He was in a wheelchair but sometimes it's difficult to ask why. Eventually I decided I would ask. It turned out he had been caught up in the Mumbai terrorist attacks, had been forced to jump out of a window and had broken his back. I was speechless. 'My God,' I thought. 'There's me worrying about things like not getting selected or whether I've made a mistake in training. You go away thinking: 'There are a lot of people worse off than me.'"

It was a timely reminder for all sorts of reasons. Ellis has not had it remotely easy following a knee reconstruction which wrecked not only his World Cup dream but encouraged a procession of rivals to leapfrog him in the half-back queue. At the World Cup it was Andy Gomarsall, Shaun Perry and Peter Richards; since then Richard Wigglesworth, Danny Care, Paul Hodgson and Ben Foden have also edged in and out of the frame. 

Hence the extent of Ellis's despair 16 months ago when England took the field against South Africa in Paris: "It was one of the lowest points I've ever experienced. Not to be involved was heart-breaking. I just couldn't watch it. In the end I just thought: 'I can't keep beating myself up about this' and walked out of the house. I found it really difficult and I still do now whenever I'm not playing. You just want to be out there being successful. I've learned that rugby is a massive rollercoaster."

Hence the alacrity with which the youngest of three rugby-playing brothers has grasped his unexpected recall to England's elite, displaying all the tenacity of a drowning man spying a passing log. Had Care not slipped on icy steps and damaged ankle ligaments in the week before this month's Italy game, the Leicester man might still be stuck on the outer, having only just returned from a six-week ban for up-ending the world's highest-profile player, Dan Carter, in a Heineken Cup pool tie in Perpignan. It was an episode which, at the time, threatened to have even more significant consequences. In retrospect it proved a relative blessing. "Looking back I had six weeks when I trained my arse off. All credit to the conditioning guys at Leicester; they flogged me over Christmas and it's made me a better player." 

Not that he has entirely forgiven those who rushed to condemn him. "I've got my own opinions which I'll keep to myself.... all I'll say is that it was unfortunate and that split-second misjudgements can happen in a hugely physical contact sport. There's no intent to hurt people; I don't play rugby to do that."

His new-found sense of perspective, though, may yet be the greatest gift of all. When he first burst on the first-class scene, scoring a high-profile try at the City Ground, Nottingham to propel Leicester into the Heineken Cup final, professional rugby seemed an absurdly simple game. The son of a police detective who also played for the Tigers as a back-rower, Ellis grew up locally in Wigston and never really bothered much about life beyond the touchline. 

"Perhaps when I was younger rugby was everything. I'm not saying it isn't now but you need something else in your life. When you finish training you need something to keep you sane. I still do extra gym sessions but I switch off more now and try not to think about constantly. When I was younger I used to beat myself up...I was never, ever happy with my game. People would say 'Well done, you've played well, you've won the game but I'd never be fully satisfied. It's a good thing in a way but, after a while, I thought: 'Just chill out and enjoy it.' I'll always try as hard as I can but sometimes you need to look at the bigger picture."

As one of only four starting survivors from the Croke calamity of 2007, he also prefers to recall another game that same year when Leicester, as England have done now, travelled across the Irish Sea without any great weight of anticipation. In the Tigers' case it was Munster who stood before them in the last big game at the old Thomond Park and Ellis remembers it fondly. 

"We weren't expected to win because no-one wins at Thomond Park. It had been a filthy wet day and the crowd were against us. Nothing was in our favour but everything clicked. It's about building your own atmosphere and gaining that untouchable feeling you get everything's going well. That's what we need to do this weekend: create our own buzz." 

Ellis is part of another reshuffled half-back pairing and has yet to beat Ireland in three attempts during his 24-cap Test career. The unbeaten hosts, even so, will encounter a much stronger, wiser man this time around.
