England have summoned the ­country's top referee to help solve the chronic ­disciplinary problem which has ­hamstrung their Six Nations campaign. Wayne Barnes will sit down with the team in Yorkshire tomorrow morning in an attempt to avoid a costly case of deja vu against France at Twickenham on Sunday week following the penalty ­epidemic which wrecked their chances of victory in Dublin.

Martin Johnson has also indicated that players who continue to infringe will put their Test places at risk but has stopped short, for now, of publicly dropping anyone from the French encounter. The Harlequins scrum-half Danny Care, who has apologised for his yellow card at Croke Park, has been sent back to his club but Johnson insisted it was purely to give him some game time this weekend.

Johnson, however, is making it clear that future "reckless or needless" ­indiscretions will not be tolerated. "Players know that if they make mistakes they won't get to play," he stressed. "They have to learn to cope with the pressure. Players make more mistakes under pressure and we need to cut them down by focusing not just on the penalties but their understanding and reaction to situations. That's the challenge, what coaching is all about.

"We're going to go through the ­penalties we've conceded in the last couple of games and eradicate any grey areas in terms of players' interpretations of what they've done. It's something we just need to keep working on. There are penalties forced on you by the opposition, technical ­mistakes and silly errors. If we can cut the silly and technical ones out, we've got a good chance of halving our penalty count."

Having reviewed the tape, Johnson has found sufficient encouragement in terms of defence and possession to shrug off criticism of England's latest defeat and their tally of 10 yellow cards in four matches. "Has it taken me aback? No. Discipline has been an issue for the last two to three weeks and it's an even bigger issue now. We're not giving ourselves a chance to win Test matches. If guys didn't get it before, they've got to now and we'll do everything to make sure they're aware. It doesn't embarrass me, it's disappointing because it's not helping us win games."

The former England captain also rejected suggestions that his squad were not listening to him and that the management are struggling to arrest the team's decline to eighth in the world. "It hasn't shaken my belief in what we're trying to do. We've had a pretty good gameplan for all three games and parts of it have worked pretty well against good teams. Ireland was a tight, intense Six Nations ­battle. If we execute our ­gameplan we can put ourselves in with a chance to win matches."

He is equally convinced the post-match reviews would have been different had England capitalised on a second-half break by Matthew Tait. "If we'd scored that try we wouldn't be talking about discipline. I played in a game in New Zealand when we were down to 13 men and it's gone down as a historic win for England."

France's coach, Marc Lièvremont, has characteristically reshuffled his pack for Twickenham by dropping the desperately unlucky Fulgence Ouedraogo and recalling Jérôme Thion and Julien Bonnaire to a 23-man squad, with Sébastien Chabal reverting to the back row. François Trinh-Duc will start at fly-half with Florian Fritz available again following a three-week ban. Damien Traille is also back as cover for the injured Lionel Beauxis and Benoît Baby.
