England's decision to single out the South African referee Jonathan Kaplan following their defeat to Wales in Cardiff was criticised yesterday by the International Rugby Board which dismissed coach Brian Smith's forthright views on the subject this week as "unwarranted".

Smith said he was "surprised" at the tone Kaplan adopted with England's players before the game and suggested the referee had not treated both sides fairly. The IRB take a dim view of officials being criticised and rejected Smith's central complaint that Kaplan did England no favours. Smith said: "From his whole demeanour through that match and the way he addressed our team in the changing room beforehand he'd clearly had heaps of pressure put on him by Wales."

In fact Kaplan has been favourably assessed for his performance during Wales's 23-15 victory. "The official review of the Wales v England match ranks Kaplan's overall performance as high," said an IRB statement. "The IRB is satisfied that Kaplan followed the correct protocol for addressing both teams on and off the field, dealt with England and Wales in a fair and professional manner and refereed what was in front of him." That amounts to another yellow card for an England team currently winning few friends in high places. Eight sin-binnings in their last three games have prompted Martin Johnson to claim his team are the victims of "a perception issue" but the IRB has reminded them that official channels exist for unions wishing "to give feedback to the IRB on refereeing performances". They also revealed that the IRB's referee manager, Paddy O'Brien, and the RFU's elite rugby director Rob Andrew had shared a "very positive" meeting on the same day a frustrated Smith spoke out at the England team hotel in Bagshot. The IRB described the timing of the comments as "regrettable and unfortunate".

It is the second time that an England coach has been rebuked following a Six Nations match refereed by Kaplan. The then head coach Andy Robinson criticised him after an Ireland v England game four years ago alleging that "only one side was refereed". The RFU ordered Robinson to cease criticising referees.

Another South African referee, Craig Joubert, is due to take charge of tomorrow's game in Dublin where England arrived yesterday with an extra hooker in case Dylan Hartley fails to recover from a strained left calf. Leicester's George Chuter has travelled as cover at a venue where England were thumped 43-13 two years ago.

Another very physical test awaits, not least for Joe Worsley after his stunning defensive effort against Wales. Had England been required to play last weekend it is doubtful their human cannonball could have lain down his body for his country to the same spectacular extent. Even a few extra days rest may be insufficient to ensure he pulls the same stunt tomorrow if only because Ireland now know better than to attack down Worsley's channel.

The Wasps' flanker is well aware his life is about to get more complicated. His search-and-destroy mission on Jamie Roberts may have succeeded in Cardiff but Ireland will pursue other ways of crossing the gain line. "I wouldn't say they're quite as direct as Wales so there'll be less of the preset stuff," admitted Worsley.

His defence coach, Mike Ford, has tweaked the game-plan and believes the weight of expectation is on the home team. "Over the past few years the Irish have had to handle the pressure of the golden generation not winning a grand slam or a championship," emphasised Ford, not anticipating a repeat of England's 2007 Croke Park collapse. "We're much better prepared for the occasion this time."
