Let's start with the vision. Within nine months Saracens hope to stage home games at Wembley and prove an irresistible magnet for the 750,000 exiled, rugby-loving South Africans in London and the south-east. Onwards and upwards they will soar, pausing only for a daily fix of biltong and boerewurst. Or something like that. When it comes to bright new dawns, the club's supporters have been let down too often to be instantly converted.

A number of the players are even more sceptical. Fifteen of them, including Chris Jack, Census Johnston and the ultimate team man Kevin Sorrell, have already been advised they will not figure in the firstteam equation next season. The head coach Eddie Jones called it "the worst week I've ever had in rugby" and claimed it was handled shabbily: "You've got to treat people well and I don't think that happened."

Speculation about an instant Springbok influx under the next head coach Brendan Venter also continues to infuriate the Professional Rugby Players' Association. "I fear that if this becomes common practice, contracts won't be worth the paper they're written on," warns Damian Hopley, the PRA's chief executive. He openly questions the management's motives – "There are a lot of smokescreens" – and insists the players will stand up for their rights.

Cue Edward Griffiths, Saracens' smooth-talking new chief executive who knows all about crisis management from his previous life in a similar trouble-shooting role at the South African Rugby Football Union. Lurking amid the Hertfordshire heartache, he insists, is a far bigger concern for the Premiership than a few extra imports. "I think some people still haven't grasped the full overall reality of English rugby which is that many of the clubs rely for survival on what amounts to charitable donations by individuals," murmurs Griffiths. "That's not sustainable."

The facts would appear to bear him out. Saracens, in Griffiths' own words, are "haemorrhaging money." They were ­losing in excess of £2m a season even before the global economic crisis started. Their long-time backer Nigel Wray felt unable to continue alone and last year managed to coax £7m from a South African consortium headed by Johann Rupert, the Roman Abramovich of the Cape winelands. The club's board of directors now includes the ex-Springboks Francois Pienaar and Morne du Plessis, as well as Rupert's daughter Caroline. It is understood the shareholders are already being asked to chip in more money to keep the men in black solvent until May.

The turnstiles are hardly whirring either. The last home game, against Sale, attracted a crowd of 8,311. The only other Premiership game at Vicarage Road this year drew 5,881. Griffiths advises that 15,000 is the figure required to turn a modest profit. The rationale behind Saracens' abrupt handbrake-turn is suddenly clear. "When our squad is eventually announced, people will be unimpressed because there won't be the big star names which have been associated with the club in the past," revealed Griffiths. "If any club has proved that parachuting in high-profile, high-cost southern hemisphere players towards the end of their careers doesn't work it's ­Saracens. That is absolutely not what is going to happen."

So what is the plan? At least one home game next season, possibly two, will be staged at Wembley to woo those who remain resistant to the charms of ­Watford. If Stade Français can do it, say the optimists, why not Sarries? "There are 750,000 rugby-loving South Africans who have yet to attach themselves to a rugby club," repeats Griffiths. "Any business wants to find a new market." Venter will recruit younger, cheaper squad members and, potentially, one marquee name to entice new patrons. This will not involve Bryan Habana or Jean de Villiers but a four-month autumn loan deal involving Schalk Burger remains possible, assuming he is permitted – à la Dan Carter – to be registered in two countries simultaneously.

That still leaves the supposed dead wood. Some of the judgments have been brutal. The now-injured England A prop Nick Lloyd was allegedly told that, at 32, he was too old, which may interest his lawyers. "A lot of players want to stay and fight for their places," reports Hopley tersely, indignant that contracted staff are under pressure, as he sees it, to "go quietly". What a mess. Venter will be the 11th different head coach in as many years, not counting the caretaker stewardship of Kyran Bracken and Richard Hill.

The Saracens board will also need to prove that its part-owners' stakes in the Blue Bulls and Stormers Super 14 franchises back home do not cut across International Board regulations. "It's not a takeover because the shareholding in the club is equal," retorts Griffiths. "This process is being portrayed as some kind of voracious South African takeover. It simply isn't fact. The idea that 15 South Africans are going to arrive off the plane, put on the jersey and play is just nonsense."

Griffiths is nobody's fool. Educated in England, he was the brains behind the "One Team, One Country" slogan that helped propel the rainbow nation to their unforgettable World Cup triumph in 1995. At the last count he has written or ghosted 22 books, most recently Sir Jackie Stewart's best-selling autobiography. He also knows enough about journalism, as a former sports editor and TV executive, to know rumours can be hard to bury. "The team is called Saracens and that's not changing. Definitely, definitely not. No London South Africa, not Saraboks, not any of this nonsense. It's amazing how many times you can say something and how often the opposite can be repeated."

Either way, there is still talk that Saracens will move to a new central London home, possibly Fulham's Craven Cottage, and much inter-hemisphere paranoia ahead of today's game at Harlequins. "It's being portrayed in the press that we're ripping up contracts and throwing people out on the streets but it's not like that," sighs ­Griffiths. "It has been whipped up and completely overblown. Let's wait and see what ­happens. People will start to see the South African dimension is not a threat but a huge opportunity which, frankly, is coveted by our competitors." Assuming, that is, they all survive the onrushing financial hurricane.

