It is almost 11 months since Martin Johnson was unveiled at Twickenham as England's soon-to-be manager. Remember what he said that April lunchtime? By chance I found the cutting protruding from a sea of paper beneath my desk yesterday. "I'm aware there's a perception that if I'm involved it will all be OK and we'll be successful. But that's not the reality and it never was. I've got my eyes open. I'm not thinking I can turn up and it will work straightaway. It's about getting the right environment and getting the right people around the team in all the various roles. And, obviously, getting the right players and helping them to reach their potential."

Digging a little further into a teetering stack of discarded intros I also happened across a crumpled charity leaflet. Last year Johnson, along with several other sports stars, supplied a picture with a personalised message on it to be auctioned in aid of Trinity Hospice. The former World Cup-winning captain's note was short and pithy. "If they are going to call you this superhuman and you believe it then you should also believe it when they call you a tosser" – NB: If you type "Martin Johnson" and "tosser" into a search engine you'll currently find 10 of the limited-edition prints on eBay.) Never let it be said Johnno was not braced for the peaks and troughs of his current role, nor that he does not possess a human side.

The weekend defeat in Ireland, though, represented a personal watershed. Johnson the manager has now lost as many Tests – five – in four months as he did in five years as England's on-field captain. He did the job 39 times between 1998 and 2003 and won on 34 occasions. No wonder he is starting to look slightly peevish. For all his Captain Sensible talk last April, these are now uncharted waters.

No longer is he surrounded by great players who required no prompting to perform miracles on a weekly basis. People are also starting to mutter. Someone who knew him well as a player told a friend of mine over the weekend that he believes Johnson is uninterested in the job. It hasn't taken long, has it? Perhaps it would be more accurate to speculate that large tracts of it never really appealed from the outset. Engaging proactively with the media, stirring up rival coaches for his own ends, trying to sweet-talk referees, experimenting with young players to accelerate their development ... it is scarcely a check list of Johnno's favourite things. Frustration with England's performances persuaded him to throw his hat into the managerial ring, but he has been taken aback by the weight of off-field matters demanding his attention.

It was revealing, too, that he recalled Andy Goode for Six Nations duty without having watched him play for Brive. Sure, he knows Goode's game inside out from their Leicester days but he was also nowhere to be seen at Wasps v Northampton the other day when Danny Cipriani and Ben Foden, to name but two, might both have hoped to impress him. It was the day after a charity cycling event in Manchester when, presumably, the big man was feeling a touch saddle-sore.

It is alleged, furthermore, that Johnson has no time for players who court a celebrity lifestyle. That's clearly his prerogative but it sets him instantly apart from the Twitter generation. Cipriani has an attractive partner who happens to earn her living in the public eye. The young man barely drinks and can hardly be blamed if photographers take his picture whenever he walks down the street.

I met a taxi driver in Dublin at the weekend who gleefully told me that Kelly Brook had once occupied the seat I was in. Yer man revealed he had driven her and a friend to a club before advising her to call him back in 20 minutes because he knew she wouldn't enjoy the place. As predicted his phone soon rang and he ferried her to somewhere more salubrious. How much would you pay for that sort of service? Apparently Ms Brook gave him £200 sterling and could not have been friendlier or more down to earth. She doesn't sound like my idea of a malign influence.

It is worth repeating at this point what I've always stressed over the past year or so. England will get better, potentially dramatically so, in the next two or three years. The question is how quickly it is going to happen and that's where Johnson has a potential problem. Home defeats against France and Scotland for an England side still playing with the handbrake on would be tough to explain away, particularly if more players continue down the well-trodden path to the sin-bin. Johnson is taking his team away to Yorkshire for three days this week in a break from normal routine which suggests he is not simply going through the motions. Thank goodness for that. England urgently need some inspiration to set alongside their perspiration if they wish to get out of their current rut. Now is the moment for their totem to earn his money and persuade more players to think outside their Xboxes.

