Forget the one-point margin of defeat, a red herring if ever there was one. If the Rugby Football Union is not seriously concerned about the image of its national team this morning, it should be. If only it were a simple matter of yellow cards and trigger-happy referees. Any number of theories were circulating in Dublin on Saturday night, none of them flattering. Can the siren whispers really be true? Is the great Martin Johnson out of his depth as an international manager and presiding over a bunch of dimwits who pay minimal attention to what he says? It is starting to look horribly like it.

Johnson, if nothing else, finds himself in charge of a team whose lack of discipline is an international joke. Ten yellow cards in four games is not the sole reason the visitors find themselves in the bottom half of the Six Nations table, but the time for excuses expired long ago. Within the next 48 hours England's players will be ushered into a darkened room to review the 16 penalties which allowed Ireland to inch closer to a first grand slam since 1948. It will not be a cosy fireside chat.

"Johnno was pretty angry in the changing room after the game and I think he has every right to be," said Phil Vickery, one of two English players to be binned. "I would think there will be harsh words and I don't blame Johnno for that. It's not rocket ­science. If you give away penalties you're going to lose Test matches. We've got to do something about it."

Similar sentiments are routinely expressed after every England game, which demands the question of why a side with a well-organised defence has developed such a penchant for self-harm? Brian Clough, to name just one old-school operator, would have had the culprits up against a wall long ago. Perhaps Johnson is still too much of a player at heart and needs to bring more of his old ruthless streak to his new role. When you have spent months hammering home the importance of patience and restraint, a litany of 16 penalties and two free-kicks is surely unforgivable.

Maybe, though, it is not entirely the players' fault. If the gameplan is purely to negate rather than create, it breeds a ­miserabilist attitude which invites knee-jerk cynicism. Vickery has been among England's best players this season. When he gets carded by a referee whose performance he later applauded, it is a symptom of something far more deep-seated. ­England have also failed to appreciate that setting out to kill opponents' ball all day is a risky business. The time has come to wonder aloud precisely what Johnson the ­manager is playing at.

The strain is also starting to show on his captain Steve Borthwick, who was heard to warn a BBC radio reporter he would never speak to him again if the latter posed any leading questions on air. Johnson, too, insisted on television it was "not the right time to start asking questions like that" when the subject of dropping the miscreants was raised. There was nothing wrong with the timing of the questions, already on the lips of millions of viewers.

As for Danny Care, guilty of a daft shove from behind on the loose-head ­Marcus Horan, the scrum-half is at the mercy of Johnson's fraying loyalty. "It's costing us a chance to win games," sighed the manager, his frustration deepened by Ronan O'Gara's poor kicking ratio of two from six attempts which gave­ ­England a late sniff. "These guys work hard but it's just crazy to give it away. I hate using the words 'learning process' but they've got to understand they won't win games doing that."

What makes it even less palatable is that England's defence is the tightest it has been for a while. Brian O'Driscoll suggested it had been "one of the most physical Test matches I've played for a long time" and had a throbbing headache to prove it prior to his courageous dive beneath a stooping Julian White for ­Ireland's crucial 57th-minute try with the opposition – surprise, surprise – reduced to 14 men. He had earlier landed a rare drop-goal, which all gave the hosts just enough breathing space in the closing moments after Delon Armitage had gathered Andy Goode's rolling chip.

At the moment, though, England do not invite much sympathy. This was another frequently dire game in an increasingly non-vintage championship and Johnson's record as manager is now played 7, lost 5 with a resurgent France due at Twickenham on Sunday week. While Ireland's grand-slam hunters seek to emulate the profiles of their compatriots U2, this England team has too many ­simple minds.

