So what next for the Six Nations? This weekend, for better or worse, the circus moves to a Friday night for the first time. It simply doesn't feel right. Friday evenings are for films and bars, chatting and unwinding, eating and drinking (insert your own Gavin Henson joke here). And just imagine the family arguments up and down the country. "So let's get this straight: I'm not allowed to watch EastEnders/Coronation Street/American Idol/the cricket from Barbados/Wakefield Wildcats v Warrington Wolves (delete as applicable) because you want to see France v Wales?" My money is on Ricky and Bianca getting an early nudge on John Inverdale.


It's not an entirely new concept, of course. England played both South Africa and Tonga on a Friday night during the last World Cup. For waiters, newspaper sub-editors and girlfriends, it was hell on earth. Half the fun of the tournament is the Saturday morning anticipation, the speculation, the waiting. Play on Fridays and it's all over before closing time, the equivalent of sex without the foreplay.


Hopefully it'll be a stinker and the organisers will revert to the natural order of things, having absorbed the golden rule of Friday night sport: It only works in places where there isn't much else to do. Scheduling it in central Paris pretty much qualifies as a criminal offence. Come on guys, get a life.


On the subject of innovation, however, imagine the following scenario. It is the 79th minute at the Stade de France and the home side have just been awarded a penalty in front of the sticks. The Welsh forwards have been penalised for killing the ball and, with France trailing 25-24, the visitors' grand-slam goose looks cooked. Or is it? Under an experimental new rule inspired by the referral system in Test cricket, the Wales captain Ryan Jones is allowed to challenge one refereeing call per game. Shrewdly, he has kept his wildcard up his sleeve for precisely this situation. The decision goes upstairs where close inspection of the slow-motion replays indicates a French knock-on half a second earlier. Scrum to Wales, kick to touch, game over, grand-slam bid still intact.


Is this progress? Having watched a number of recent games settled by marginal – or plain dodgy – calls, I would suggest it is at least worth a trial at domestic level. France's forward-pass try against Scotland last week and Northampton's non-try against Wasps on Sunday (when the charging Ben Foden was hauled back off the ball out of sight of the referee and touch judges) are merely the latest examples of game-bending moments evident to everyone bar the officials.


Umpteen referrals would clearly be impractical but allowing each side to query one penalty decision per 80 minutes would not slow the game down unduly and would also revive the role of the on-field captain. The skipper would not be allowed to seek advice from the touchline and would have only 10 seconds or so to lodge a protest. The side protesting in the heat of the moment and getting it wrong would lose out, the cool-headed would thrive and justice might just be done slightly more often.


As things stand, it must be stressed, there is no concerted global push to back the Kitson Initiative. I did, however, run it past England's attack coach Brian Smith who has been tearing his hair out about England's recent yellow cards as well as the consistency of the officiating in this year's championship. "We had a player (Delon Armitage) taken out in the air and there's no yellow," he protested, still dirty about his side's two sin-binnings against Wales. "It was Mike Tindall's first offence and it was touch and go whether he'd won the ball. Then Andy Goode went to play the ball, one of our players knocks into him and it looks like he's off his feet."


So would he prefer the option of a referral to correct such perceived wrongs? Smith's overwhelming priority, understandably, is Ireland this weekend but he sounded like someone who could be persuaded. "If you have a look at the matches so far in the Six Nations you could argue that penalties have determined the outcomes of games. Some of them have been grey-area penalties and it's clearly an issue the big thinkers in the game are trying to get their heads around. The (free kick) ELVs being used in the southern hemisphere are already an attempt to take the referee out of the game in terms of influencing the outcome. But those aren't the rules we're playing under so we have to get on with what's in front of us." Of course. But if referrals ever get the go-ahead just remember where you read it first.

