What was once a trickle is fast becoming a flood. London Wasps are facing up to the reality that at least four of their first-team squad will relocate abroad to play their club rugby next season and yesterday's departure of Riki Flutey to Brive and the imminent loss of James Haskell and Tom Palmer to France may be just the start, according to sources on both sides of the Channel. The implications for the English national team and the Guinness Premiership clubs could be considerable.

Yesterday, to rub it in, there was even renewed speculation about Jonny Wilkinson and a move to Racing Métro which, for English supporters, really would be a sign of the times. Where Jonny goes, others will surely follow and the list of England squad players volunteering to join the foreign legion is lengthening rapidly. Haskell, Palmer and Flutey, who yesterday signed a two-year deal with Brive, are not has-beens seeking a retirement nest-egg, while their fellow internationals Ben Cohen, Fraser Waters, Andy Goode, Steve Thompson and Magnus Lund have already made the leap.

"There's an eight-year agreement which the Rugby Football Union and the clubs have signed based on their players playing in England," stressed Damian Hopley, chief executive of the Professional Rugby Players' Association. "If suddenly they don't, that deal falls apart."

Of course, money talks and young professional athletes will invariably listen. Basing himself in Milan has done David Beckham no harm. But rugby union is at a delicate stage in its commercial history and Hopley says there will "undoubtedly" be more departures, as a consequence of the "staggering wage levels" in France as opposed to the salary-capped Premiership. "It could have a fundamental impact on the fabric of the English game and the national team. I still think we'll retain a lot of our talent, but my worry is that we'll see a lot of our younger players potentially going overseas. As English fans, we'd prefer that doesn't happen at the outset of their careers."

For the England management, and the RFU, who did not respond on the situation yesterday, it could swiftly become a major headache. The good news is that Haskell will still be playing in the Heineken Cup but the Stade owner, Max Guazzini, is under no obligation to release the 23-year-old outside statutory Test windows. By recalling Brive's Goode, however, Martin Johnson has set a precedent in terms of picking expats and, to Hopley's mind, the RFU is in a tricky position: "It just goes to show Johnno wasn't instrumental in any of the deal which was put together."

There will be little sympathy from the southern hemisphere, which has seen its best players syphoned off in ever-increasing numbers, or anywhere else. The majority of Argentinians and Italians ply their trade in other countries, while several of Scotland's finest are employed elsewhere. Coincidentally or not, Northampton's Euan Murray and Perpignan's Nathan Hines have both been sidelined from this year's Six Nations through injury, while Jason White has signed for Clermont Auvergne. The national coach Frank Hadden has made clear that the scattered nature of his squad makes his job appreciably more difficult. Market forces, though, cannot be defied. "Looking at some of the reports, I suspect Jonny is probably going to go to France," continued Hopley. "I think players in their 20s will think: 'If I don't do this now, I'm not sure I'll ever get another crack.' Given the ever-present injury risk you can understand them being keen to capitalise on their earning potentialwhile they can. The new TV deal here doesn't kick in for 18 months and the owners are staring at the worst economic outlook we've had for decades. Some clubs are on their last few litres of oxygen in trying to stay intact until the end of the season. Something has to give."

While it is not an entirely new pheno­menon – Maurice Colclough was at Angoulême when he helped England win the 1980 grand slam – the lure of the euro has never been stronger. Premier Rugby's chief executive, Mark McCafferty, is understandablywary - "If it became a long-term trend we'd have to be concerned" - but suggests a less lopsided exchange rate and reservations within France about the rise in imports will ultimatelyapply the brake.

McCafferty also highlights the rising number of English-qualified academy players making their Premiership debuts, while average club crowds have risen during the Six Nations for the past two seasons. That said, Wasps and Leicester met on Sunday without a dozen players engaged on international duty. Would the result have been the same with both sides at full strength? And what price the integrity of the league table if more top English players start to call the Top 14 home? These are uncharted waters for club and country.

