Issuing a press release on Easter Monday can only mean one of two things: an organisation is trying to sneak something under the radar or is so excited it cannot wait until everyone returns to work on Tuesday morning. No prizes for guessing which category applied to the celebratory statement issued by Magners League officials trumpeting the fact their competition has supplied three of the Heineken Cup semi-finalists. If Leicester needed any extra motivation, they now have it.


No one can possibly deny, of course, that this has so far been a Celtic season of seasons. Ireland's grand slam, following on from Wales's similar achievement last year, has left the French, in particular, with much explaining to do. Yet for the Guinness Premiership clubs all is not yet lost. Gloucester remain hopeful of beating Cardiff Blues in Saturday's EDF Energy Cup final at Twickenham, while the Tigers are still prowling. France's failure to supply a single semi-finalist, moreover, means there will be seven English sides in the Heineken Cup next season even if Saracens, Northampton or Worcester fail to win the Challenge Cup.


Leicester's continuing hunt for a domestic and European double also proves what everyone secretly knows: that the Guinness Premiership and Magners League both contain good and bad sides and that straight comparisons between the competitions are like discussing the relative merits of gravy and custard.


If Munster played in the Premiership they would be in the top four or higher; the same would apply to Leicester in the Magners. The only time they can meet is in the Heineken Cup when, almost without exception, there is less than a score in it. If the English have more overseas muscle on their books, the Irish pool of homegrown talent is less diluted with only three major provinces to cater for. You can argue the rights and wrongs until the County Kerry cows come home.


Instead, with a month of the season to go, let's take the old Peter Gabriel approach and play games without frontiers. Munster, as things stand, are a confident, well-organised side who would already appear to have the Magners League wrapped up. When the Lions squad is announced next week there is an increasing case for taking the Denis Leamys, Alan Quinlans and Marcus Horans, purely on the weight of their provincial records. Leinster are game and defensively resilient but will need to find something sharper to pierce the Munster machine if they are to avoid the bridesmaid's bouquets.


Cardiff Blues? I have a feeling they will win the EDF, based on the growing evidence they possess a defensive wall more durable than any other Welsh region in the professional era. If Gloucester could not beat them at Kingsholm against only 14 men, one suspects the Blues will fancy themselves at Twickenham. Less certain is whether they can hold their nerve at the Millennium Stadium against Leicester on 3 May; by that time their opponents are likely to have finished top of the heap in the Premiership and all sorts of possibilities may have opened up.


Even five points from their remaining two fixtures away to Saracens and at home to Bristol are likely to be enough to keep the Tigers in pole position, while Harlequins also appear in line for a home semi-final draw unless they lose heavily to Sale in Stockport this Friday night. It would not surprise me if the semi-final line-up ends up as follows: Leicester v Bath and Harlequins v London Irish. In that event, it will be awfully hard to look past Richard Cockerill's team in the grand final. They also have a deep-enough squad to squeeze past the Blues which leaves everything up for grabs in Edinburgh on 23 May. A Munster v Leicester final would round the season off nicely and resolve all manner of arguments.
