A leading Premiership coach has warned that England may have to stop picking non-residents for the national side in an effort to halt the exodus of squad members to France following confirmation that James Haskell, Riki Flutey and Tom Palmer will be joining the growing foreign legion in the Top 14 next season.

Rugby Football Union officials are to debate the increasingly pressing issue at a management board meeting next week and Bath's Steve Meehan, formerly assistant coach at Stade Français, believes that sidelining ex-pat players could yet be a realistic option. "I think they will consider it," said Meehan yesterday. "Whether they need to do anything about it we'll have to wait and see, but in James Haskell they've got a young player right at the beginning of his international career. That's got to be a bit of a concern."

Meehan also suspects there are several other players who have not yet announced their plans for next season. "Are they the only guys who are going to go or is it the tip of the iceberg? I'm sure that'll be the question they're asking at headquarters. Other countries have said that, if you're playing, for example, in England, you won't play for the Wallabies or the All Blacks. I don't think they'll make that decision too hastily but who knows? It wouldn't be a case of restraint of trade because selection policies are up to individual unions."

It is understood that Stade Français, who have agreed terms with Haskell and Palmer, are prepared to release their English players whenever practicable but there will be inevitable timetable clashes during the season. The Top 14 runs from August to June and, assuming Stade are involved in the latter stages of the French championship, Haskell will struggle to feature on England's summer tour next year.

Meehan, who spent four years in Paris, also reckons Haskell will not necessarily return as an improved player and that the flanker, if he wanted to leave Wasps, should have joined either Bath, Sale or Ospreys, who all tabled bids for the 23-year-old. "As a rugby decision, any of the three British clubs would have been a better bet. He'll be playing in the Heineken Cup, obviously, and the games against Toulouse, Clermont, Perpignan and Biarritz will be competitive. But of the 26 Top 14 league games, 10 will be cakewalks. By and large the Premiership clubs are more professionally run and the intensity of this league improves players. Potentially he could be a tremendous back-rower for a long time but it'll be interesting to talk to him in 18 months and find what he's got out of it."

The RFU, meanwhile, is due to meet Haskell's representatives next week prior to next Wednesday's management board meeting. There will also be discussions with Premier Rugby (PRL) about the possible long-term effects on the English club game and the elite player scheme which makes no provision for England players based overseas. The eight-year agreement between the union and the clubs is still in year one but the RFU reiterated yesterday it was already concerned "about the effect of PRL 'revenue smoothing' arrangements on our clubs' abilities to remain competitive in the player market".

Wasps's executive chairman, Mark Rigby, is also worried that Premiership clubs are struggling to keep pace with their cash-rich French counterparts. "It does raise great concern that French clubs can now blow the English clubs away when it comes to salaries and it is clear that in financial terms we are no longer on a level playing field. There is a wider concern that the development of English rugby players will only be hampered as they move away from the Guinness Premiership."

Bath's captain, Michael Lipman, is hoping to return for Saturday's vital Premiership game against London Irish after being sidelined for three weeks with concussion.
