England have done little to enhance their growing reputation as the bad boys of international rugby by accusing the world's most experienced Test referee of favouring the grand slam champions Wales during their Six Nations defeat in Cardiff 10 days ago and demanding fairer treatment from South Africa's Craig ­Joubert at Croke Park on Saturday.

With eight yellow cards in their last three games and 25 penalties conceded in two championship games, England are acutely aware of the need to clean up their act, but they also feel they have become victims of what Martin Johnson calls "a perception issue". Their frustration has now boiled over with their attack coach, Brian Smith, criticising Jonathan Kaplan's performance. "There's no doubt Wales played up to Kaplan," he said of Joubert's compatriot. "From his whole demeanour through that match and the way he addressed our team in the changing room beforehand, he'd clearly had heaps of pressure put on him by Wales. It was clear to me that Wales had done their job in terms of getting stuck into the referee."

It is one thing to suggest a referee might have been swayed by a home crowd, quite another to claim an official taking charge of his 49th Test was intent on treating the visiting side more harshly before a ball was kicked. Smith was not blaming Wales – "fair play to them for doing it" – but the implication that the Wales coach, Warren Gatland, played Kaplan like a violin before the match. It revived memories of the then-England coach Andy Robinson's criticism of the same official after an Ireland-England game four years ago. Robinson alleged that "only one side was refereed" after two England "tries" were not referred to the video referee. The Rugby Football Union reprimanded Robinson and told him to cease criticising officials.

Smith's strident plea for more even-handed treatment in Dublin would suggest England are now nursing a fresh persecution complex, particularly at the breakdown. "We're just saying to referees: 'Please judge us the same way you judge other teams and don't come in with a preconceived idea,'" insisted Smith. "The breakdown is clearly an area where they're going to try and slow us down and it is a concern for us. We want that to be refereed well. If we go into the tackle area and don't contest for the ball we'll be blown away in the first half."

Scrummaging coach Graham Rowntree is also vexed by the stream of yellow cards - "It would appear to be a bit of a band-wagon" - and the England skipper Steve Borthwick is similarly uneasy. "What we hope is that Joubert referees both sides equally. We want consistency and I don't think that's asking too much. I don't want us to be reliant on rubs of the green." The Northampton hooker Dylan Hartley looks certain to miss Saturday's game with a calf strain, offering a potential bench return for Leicester's George Chuter when the team is confirmed tomorrow.
