Steve Meehan thinks he knows the secret of rugby union. "It's a state of mind," murmurs Bath's softly-spoken head coach, happy to discuss the underlying reasons why his side have bucked the dull-witted trend and played some of the best rugby in England for the past two seasons. "It's about philosophies and fears. Some coaches fear losing. I believe you're more likely to lose a game if you go into your shell."

One or two other coaches around the Guinness Premiership, not to mention the England management, will instinctively retort that winning consistently is not about style or speculation. Meehan, however, will not be swayed by the terminally pragmatic or one-dimensional. "This sounds really negative but if I was to fail I'd want to fail on my terms. The last thing you want, in my opinion, is to be removed from office because you were trying to please everybody instead of saying: 'This is what I believe in and this is the way we're going to go.'"

All of which explains why Bath have reached the Heineken Cup quarter-finals and are fast emerging as the Premiership's title favourites despite a series of unfortunate events which would have tested even Lemony Snicket. The ongoing saga of the club's continuing inability to upgrade the Recreation Ground, Matt Stevens's drug shame ... the noises off have been deafening. Meehan, by rights, should be a nervous wreck; instead, on the eve of today's significant home game against second-placed London Irish, the 42-year-old Queenslander seems implausibly calm. Coaches who keep their heads when all around are losing theirs are rarer than you think.

Even more unusual, until recently, have been English club sides prepared to play the offloading, high-tempo game which is now Bath's trademark. Despite one of the tightest league campaigns and wettest winters in recent memory, Meehan's men have registered 35 tries in 12 games this season. Only the second-placed Irish, with 37, have crossed the tryline more often but they have played two matches more. So why is it that England's Six Nations team contains only one Bath man: the hooker Lee Mears? "You've got to look at what they're trying to do," shrugs Meehan, trying and failing to sound remotely enthused.

To understand Meehan's methods fully, it is necessary to rewind to suburban Brisbane in the early 1980s. His father was raised in the rugby league heartland of Toowoomba on the Darling Downs and worked for the Commonweath Bank before moving the family to the Brisbane suburb of Ashgrove. At nearby Marist College, which also produced John Eales and Matthew Hayden, the first team coach was the former Wallaby centre Barry Honan, whose brother Bobby played both union and league for his country.

Honan's playing career was cut short at 24 but his passion for rugby theory has remained undimmed and his mantra – "he was obsessed with running and passing as opposed to kicking" – has stayed with his young protege. Around the corner lived Jake Howard, another ex-Wallaby better known nowadays as the father of Pat. Howard's father-in-law was Cyril Towers, widely acknowledged as the founding father of Wallaby back play.

It was a hothouse of ideas into which Meehan, an average scrum-half whose career was also curtailed by injury, ­fitted seamlessly. "There's a set of fields at Ashgrove where we grew up called the Flats. There used to be endless games of touch rugby and little kids like Pat would be playing aged 10 or 12 against 17-year-olds. There were an enormous number of people in that part of the world at the time who really wanted to see running rugby."

From his days as a successful first-grade coach to backs coach at Stade Français (before switching to Bath in 2006 he helped steer them to the 2005 Heineken Cup final), Meehan has never surrendered his belief that rugby is primarily a ­handling game.

"I think it's an error to think the Premiership just has to be about contact. There are some great athletes here. The Premiership isn't brilliant every week because of its length, the intensity of it and the conditions. But it is capable of being absolutely marvellous. It doesn't have to be 10-man rugby."

H e is not the first Bath coach to feel that way but there are plenty of ghosts floating around the Georgian city. Meehan, though, has left the brains of Jack Rowell, Andy Robinson and Brian Ashton deliberately unpicked. "It would be an easy place to seek advice if you wished," he replies, deadpan. Beneath his everyman persona lies a coach who knows his own mind and expects the same of his players.

"You are looking for people who are prepared to back themselves. There have been big changes in two years but two results this season stick in my mind: our home games against Leicester and Sale. If the players hadn't had strength of character or self-belief we wouldn't have won either of those two matches." So what about Leicester and Toulouse away, when Bath lost games they should have won? "Perhaps two years ago we would have got smashed. That's the other way of looking at it."

Either way, Meehan believes Bath should be getting more credit. "­Perhaps people felt last season was a flash in the pan and they expected us to fade again." Some good has even come out of the ­Stevens affair, with the players having volunteered to produce a new code of ­conduct. "The players are the ones formulating the way forward," nods ­Meehan. "It doesn't carry the same amount of weight if I come in wagging the finger at them."

It is yet another example of his subtle but effective man-management. Other suitors are starting to circle but Meehan is contracted until the end of next season and, during two meetings with senior ­officials spanning nine hours last summer, heard enough to convince him the club is determined to extricate itself from the off-field mire. Would he fancy coaching at Test level one day? "I think it's far too stressful. I'm not too long-term in terms of the ambition department." As long as Bath continue to reach for the skies, their unassuming guru will be happy.
