England players should think twice about the consequences of chasing the euro. There is no knowing how many may be considering relocation to France but Martin Johnson could scarcely have made it clearer yesterday that overseas-based squad members will not necessarily be allowed to have their cake and eat it and a laissez-faire attitude is no guarantee when the Rugby Football Union's management board meet next Wednesday.

The problem does not so much relate to James Haskell, Riki Flutey or Tom Palmer, all of whom believe their new deals will allow them to attend England training whenever Johnson summons them. If nine or 10 EPS squad members, on the other hand, were to move across the Channel, it would prompt serious disquiet at Twickenham, where officials are understandably keen not to undermine either the future of the national side or the market­ability of the Guinness Premiership.

The majority of the England squad are currently under contract to English clubs beyond this summer but, as the RFU's elite rugby director, Rob Andrew, emphasised, that still does not rule out the possibility of further movement, as demonstrated by Andy Goode's switch from Leicester to Brive last year. While no more squad members have yet confessed to ­Johnson that they are packing for Calais, it is ­understood recent England players such as Iain Balshaw and Shaun Perry are not the only other potential Europhiles in the frame.

There is also the vexed matter of the theoretically sacrosanct elite player agreement between the clubs and the union. It is not simply about training days. French-based players will not enjoy the same medical profiling and fitness testing arrangements, nor be limited in terms of the number of games they can play in a season.

"We've known it's been in the offing for a while and obviously it puts them outside the agreement," said the England manager, Johnson. "It does make it more difficult in certain areas, you can't deny that. They've all said they don't want this to affect them playing for England and we're talking to their agents about ensuring the release details and dates are in their contracts. We've told all of them they need that taken care of, otherwise it makes it very difficult."

It is believed Haskell and Palmer have done their utmost to ensure there is no conflict of interest between the RFU and their future employers, Stade Français, while Brive's English chief executive, Simon Gillham, is promising the club will co-operate fully with England's wishes when it comes to Flutey's and Goode's availabilty. In the recent past, however, both Wales and Ireland have publicly expressed a selectorial preference for home-based players and it is not impossible the RFU will be forced to issue similar ground-rules.

For the moment, though, Andrew is biding his time rather than taking the nuclear option of removing non-residents from Test consideration, as is mostly the case in Australia and New Zealand. "I personally don't think that's appropriate at this point in time. We do have to consider the implication this may have on both the Premiership and English rugby in general but there is no policy. This is a fairly new dynamic."

Andrew played in Toulouse himself in 1991-92 but that was in the amateur era when player migration was a more ­haphazard process. The nightmare scenario for Johnson and himself would be if, in a year's time, the Gallic gravy train is still rolling and two-thirds of his starting XV are to be found sipping pastis in French cafes.

"Am I disappointed?" mused Johnson, whose own brother Will is playing in Nice. "It's not a personal thing. It's something that's happening in the game for various reasons. There have been plenty of French internationals playing over here in the past 10 years. My advice to players is to do what's best for your rugby career. I don't think they'd sacrifice their ability to play in a good team purely for the money."

There is more to professional rugby, in other words, than money. It is a message every undecided red rose player should heed if he wishes to continue representing Johnson's England.
