England's management did not need Lawrence Dallaglio to tell them that a tough weekend in Cardiff lies ahead, and their team selection yesterday confirmed they are already battening down the hatches. Joe Worsley and Mike Tindall have been around long enough not to be fazed by a passionate Valentine's Day encounter at the Millennium Stadium and their recall to the starting XV to face Wales has served notice of the visitors' no-frills intentions.

If nothing else, Martin Johnson wants his side to be hard to beat, on the entirely logical basis that a strong defence is the foundation upon which all good teams are built. At his best Dallaglio's old team-mate Worsley is among the best tacklers in Europe, and he will get plenty of opportunity to prove it on Saturday evening opposite the consummate Welsh open-side Martyn Williams. Tindall, for his part, will be asked to make the English midfield a no-through-road for Wales, not least the big, fast-improving Jamie Roberts.

At 31 and 30 respectively, however, Worsley and Tindall represent yet another guerrilla raid on England's increasingly sepia-tinted golden era. After just 55 minutes of Test rugby, last week's debutant Steffon Armitage has been jettisoned from the 22 entirely and the most naturally gifted outside centre of his generation, Mathew Tait, has once again been left to gather splinters on the bench. It is now four years since Tait made his Test debut in Cardiff yet England still seem undecided whether he is the bee's knees or not. At this rate, should Tindall suffer further back trouble this week, there is more chance of a start for Will Carling.

The flip side of the age-old argument is that Worsley and Tindall deserve a change of fortune and, given slightly better luck, might already be the most-capped players in their positions since England started playing Tests in 1871. Worsley, who has not started a Test since the Samoa pool game in the 2007 World Cup, had to wait for years behind Dallaglio, Richard Hill and Neil Back yet will be clocking up his 69th cap, just two behind Hill. Worsley has a chequered history in Cardiff, having been picked to start against Wales in this corresponding fixture two years ago only to be concussed in the opening seconds: "I remember the anthem and the kick-off … then waking up in the stand. I tried to carry on but I only know that from watching the video. I was like Bambi on ice."

Tindall, preferred to Jamie Noon and winning his 57th cap since his debut in 2000, also ended up in intensive care with a torn liver after last year's game at Twickenham, underlining Johnson's argument that Anglo-Welsh Tests are no place for the young and impressionable. Worsley is a different type of flanker from Armitage but Johnson clearly hopes dynamic defence will counter-balance England's attacking shortcomings. "Joe's defensive work is second to none," stressed the former World Cup-winning captain. "He has been playing very well, he's very experienced, a big tackler and a big carrier. It was a tough call but we think Joe is the right guy for what we want to do."

Johnson's make-'em-sweat mindset is also pretty clear from his nominated replacements. Not only is Danny Cipriani nowhere to be seen but Shane Geraghty has also been ousted, with Leicester's Toby Flood preferred as fly-half back-up to Andy Goode. Gloucester's Luke Narraway takes Worsley's place as back-row cover, with London Irish's Paul Hodgson overtaking Ben Foden as Harry Ellis's understudy. Last week Foden was the next big thing in English rugby but the management already seem to have downgraded their opinion of his specialist scrum-half skills, preferring Hodgson's close-quarter hustle and bustle. "We haven't got that much expectation and we need to go there and fight. We need to battle and quieten the crowd down."

Whether it all knits together remains, of course, the big imponderable. A review of the Italian tape did not cause Johnson to perform many somersaults – "We know as a squad we can play better than we did last week" – but he rejects Dallaglio's criticism that England have an attitude problem. "In my experience the guys work pretty hard. How far away are we? I'm not saying everything is going to be rosy in one game's time but we can keep improving."

Hearing about the departures of Luiz Felipe Scolari and Tony Adams has also failed to shake his conviction that pressure on a high-profile manager is less relevant than how individuals cope with it. "We're not doing this job for fun or a paycheck. The pressure comes from ourselves. We're more than aware of the areas we need to work on. Some of the [criticism] is fair, some isn't. You're doing everything you can to make the team better … if you're doing that, that's all you can do." A dogfight on the banks of the River Taff would suit Johnson perfectly.
