Irish rugby has never enjoyed a season like this and it is about to get better still. A Heineken Cup semi-final between Leinster and Munster at Croke Park on 2 May will smash the world record attendance for a club game and the Grand Slam champions are guaranteed a presence in next month's Edinburgh final, after a showdown in south-west London which almost provoked the biggest touchline row in the tournament's eventful history.

Heaven knows what mayhem would have unfolded had the limping All Black Nick Evans slotted a winning drop goal in the final minute rather than pulling it several metres wide. Even in victory there was deep scepticism in the Leinster camp regarding the circumstances in which Evans rejoined the fray for the crucial closing moments following a disputed blood injury suffered by the Quins replacement Tom Williams.

"I didn't see any blood," muttered the Leinster coach, Michael Cheika, who had come charging down the steps to remonstrate with tournament officials and later complained that his team doctor had not been permitted to check Williams' state of fitness.

Dean Richards, the Harlequins director of rugby, countered that Evans's original departure had been a tactical substitution and that, as a result, he could see no problem once the referee Nigel Owens had decided Williams had a genuine injury.

"You have to know your rules, don't you," shrugged the former England No8. "If you don't, it's not my problem." Rather than the camera angle which caught ­Williams winking as he left the field, he preferred to dwell on the fact Quins would have made the last four had two penalties and a conversion not sailed wide. Leinster's outstanding defence, however, did not require any second invitation to seize, or rather smother, the day.

Quins will also reflect that a little more composure would have seen them through without a need for last-gasp heroics. They were unlucky to lose Evans – whose injured right knee may force him to miss their final two Premiership games – and his initial replacement, Chris Malone, whose damaged hamstring forced a midfield reshuffle which visibly helped Leinster's cause. On the other hand, with Felipe Contepomi in the sin-bin for obstructing Chris Robshaw, their insistence on battering away on a narrow front during a prolonged siege on their opponents line, rather than exploiting the stretched Leinster back line, was merely one example of suspect thinking. They are young enough to learn and bounce back but their solitary, 66th-minute try, from Mike Brown, was a slim return for the amount of set-piece ball they secured. "They cheated very well around the breakdown," said Richards, making clear he meant it as a compliment.

Leinster's Rocky Elsom was certainly a deserved man of the match in a compelling contest which will have clarified one or two issues for the watching Lions coach, Ian McGeechan. How he must wish, however, that the elusive Evans were eligible to tour South Africa this summer. For the first quarter Dan Carter's former All Black understudy was comfortably the best player on the field, mixing intelligence with quick feet and raking touch-finders behind a pack in the ascendant. It was too good to last and a thumping tackle from the No8 Jamie Heaslip changed the game.

While Contepomi was also on the wrong end of a comprehensive clattering early on from Jordan Turner-Hall – even the hyphen gave him a passing swipe – the Puma retained sufficient presence of mind to knock over the only two penalty opportunities he was permitted, in contrast to three misses from Evans, Malone and Brown and a drop-goal attempt from Danny Care which screwed wide. As Brian O'Driscoll's national team showed in Cardiff last month, it does not pay to miss kicks against the Irish at present.

O'Driscoll, on this occasion, restricted himself to just a couple of flashes of inspiration, suffering a bang to the right shoulder which, in other circumstances, might have forced him off. Leinster still have their work cut out to beat the men of Munster – the 5,000 tickets on public sale last night were snapped up in 40 minutes – but a memorable occasion in their own fair city is already guaranteed.

