Leicester will be without the suspended prop Julian White and a clutch of senior internationals for their Heineken Cup quarter-final against Bath this Saturday but it was still impossible yesterday to ignore the purring of contented Tigers. "We're playing far better rugby and the confidence in the camp is better than it has been for a long, long time," said the acting head coach, Richard Cockerill, the man with most to gain should Leicester extend their impressive late-season surge.

If the loss of White, banned for two weeks following his red card for punching Sale's Andrew Sheridan, was no great surprise, the absence through injury of Martin Corry, Lewis Moody, Benjamin Kayser and possibly the All Black centre Aaron Mauger – his chances of recovering from a bad back in time are 50-50 – would normally be a concern. However, having collected a five-try win over Sale, optimism is so prevalent that Cockerill coolly rates his team's chances of winning the Guinness Premiership as "very realistic".

That description applies to the former England hooker's chances of succeeding Heyneke Meyer on a permanent basis. Six wins in eight matches have done him no harm but so has the Tigers' ­transformation from set-piece grinders to all-court maraud­ers. Cockerill deflects the credit to the players and his Australian backs coach, Matt O'Connor, but he also admits he now feels better able to handle the top job.

That process has basically involved delegating more responsibility and keeping a famously fiery temper in check. "The first time I did it I wanted to control everything and everybody had to do exactly what I wanted. Over the last two months I've been a bit more human. I'm quite happy to be wrong. It's not about me, it's about getting the teamwork right. Our attacking game is down to the players and Matt, it's not down to the genius of me. I'm very realistic about my abilities. I'm not going to pretend I know more about back play than Aaron Mauger, Toby Flood and Geordan Murphy, so why not let them run it? We've got some very good players and you can't talk rubbish to them because they'll suss you out in a millisecond."

In other words, the spirit of the erstwhile Tigers coach Pat Howard has been revived. "Previously I found it very difficult to deal with people who weren't similar to me," said Cockerill. "Now it's about getting them to play well. If they wear white boots and dye their hair, I couldn't care less as long as they play well. I'm learning that people tick in different ways. When I shout now, people listen. When we've played badly, I'm probably a bit ­quieter than when we play well because they expect me to come in and rant and rave. It's all right being the assistant who's a bit fiery but, if I'm on the touchline as head coach screaming and shouting, where does it stop?

"My strength and my weakness is that I'm quite direct and passionate about the club and what I do. Sometimes you have to curb that. There are some people out there with good reputations who have coached on the world stage but we'll see. I'd like to do the job and I think I'm capable of doing it."

It is a lesson White still struggles to absorb on occasions, although Leicester are standing by their 35-year-old prop. "I've got sympathy with Julian," said Cockerill. "If you stand up and a big bloke punches you in the mouth, do you have to wait for the second time it happens before you retaliate?" The big man will be available for the run-in and Cockerill knows Saturday's game at Walkers' Stadium is just a stepping stone. "We've not won anything yet. We're doing OK in the league and we're in a quarter-final but great teams go and win things." Even one trophy out of two will probably ensure that Cockerill continues in his leading role.
