To succeed in top-level sport – or write about it – there is no escaping the moral maze. Just ask Lewis Hamilton. Perhaps the most thought-provoking assessment of the McLaren formula one team's ill-fated attempt to pull a fast one came from Mike Atherton, once England's butter-wouldn't-melt cricket captain. "The biggest crime of all is not losing, but not playing fair," wrote Atherton. Elite sport, for those who earn a living from it, is not a popularity contest.

True, of course, but never has the hunt for victory at all costs been so intense or widespread. To play fair is to end up nowhere; only a loser gives an inch, particularly in rugby. Cynically killing the ball in front of your own posts to prevent a potentially crucial score is an integral part of the job. There is a chance the referee will fail to bin you, ergo it is a risk worth taking. Sure enough, when Leicester's Ben Kay dived in to halt Sale's late surge on Saturday, Wayne Barnes kept his cards in his pocket and the 14-man hosts duly won by six points. As the son of a distinguished late judge, the quick-witted Kay is better qualified than most to differentiate between a blatant sin and the more serious misdemeanour, namely getting caught.

It was ever thus since the oldest pro of them all, WG Grace, insisted a sudden breeze, rather than the ball, had disturbed his bails. Gamesmanship or cheating? It depends where you draw your personal line. Take Neil Back's infamous 'Back-Hander' which helped the Tigers win a European Cup at Munster's expense. To a man, Munster's players suggested they would have done the same. Those of us who muttered aloud about sportsmanship and winning with honour were rewarded with the sort of incredulous looks normally reserved for tweedy country parsons at Stringfellows.

All of which begs the question: do honesty and integrity count for anything in sport's brutal upper reaches? Or is an under-hand approach now compulsory? It is a legitimate inquiry. We can all name sports where the taint of drug cheats has left a grim, enduring stain. While compiling that particular list of shame we await the day that Cristiano Ronaldo, faced with a routine challenge, opts not to hit the turf like a horse which has just clipped the top of Becher's. And, since Adam Gilchrist's retirement, is there a Test cricketer out there who even considers walking after edging one to the keeper? Poachers, gamekeepers, chancers, hackers, cynics ... the forces of darkness seem to be closing in from all sides.

The truth, as we know, is that sport mirrors life: if we were all angels there would be no need for referees or umpires. The vast majority of international players are impressive people. But rugby union, in particular, might like to reflect on three things ahead of this weekend's monumental Heineken Cup quarter-finals.

The first is the lesson that Hamilton and McLaren forgot: that deception and/or cheating off the pitch or the track is regarded more seriously than anything you do on it in the heat of battle. The second is that no one likes a weasel, whether it weighs 18 stone or just a few pounds. Better an old-fashioned straight right from Julian White, for example, than a cowardly eye-gouge or cheap shot from behind.

And the third? Success at all costs is a seductive mantra but it does not guarantee universal admiration and lifelong respect. There is nothing more effective than sport for revealing inner character, eroding artifice and stripping away PR gloss. True champions, like it or not, are not purely measured by weight of silverware. The best have a humanity and generosity of spirit which defines them more surely than anything on their mantelpiece.

Declan Kidney's grace in victory after Ireland's grand slam was one case in point and the horse trainer Venetia Williams is the latest example. "I chose Venetia because she looked honest and trustworthy," revealed the winning Grand National owner Vida Bingham. The moral of the story at the business end of the oval-ball season is this: nice guys and girls can still win too.

