AT MOST clubs, the directors give the manager a broad outline of their expectations at the start of the season. At Real Madrid this is unnecessary. For half a century, give or take the occasional slump, the default setting has been win title and become European champions. Anything less and the unfortunate incumbent of the coaching post is told that his abrigo is on a percha poca firme (Castilian for shoogly peg).
A crisis board meeting at the Bernabeu at the beginning of last week implied that Bernd Schuster, after an indifferent start to the season, was a dead man walking. He is still in the job merely because Real couldn't recruit a suitably impressive candADVERTISEMENTidate to replace him overnight. 

The implicit message was that Schuster was just one bad result away from his P cuarenta y cinco. On Saturday his team achieved a mediocre result, with an undeserved 1-0 win over perennially unfashionable Recreativo Huelva who are in 19th position. Three points are three points, but the Real president and the supporters need a lot more convincing. With one half of the Real expectations, the league title, looking far from in the bag, the second half, the Champions League, comes into focus tomorrow night. Schuster finds his career prospects reliant on getting a result in Belarus against a tractor factory works team called BATE Borisov. Oh the indignity. 

Indignity is something the Real following do not appreciate. Schuster's team has already suffered the humiliation of being knocked out of the King's Cup by the Second Division B nonentities Real Union, who outfought them in the Bernabeu and progressed on away goals despite losing 4-3. They have already seen Alessandro Del Piero inspire Juventus to a comfortable victory in the same stadium (and earn himself a rare standing ovation from the home supporters). 

The King's Cup has always been a side-dish to be picked at or ignored, but the Champions League is paramount. Real's position in Group H is complicated. Schuster was easily out-thought by the venerable Claudio Ranieri and his lieutenant Del Piero in two defeats against Juventus. A visit to Belarus (where Juventus could only draw) requires a basic cohesion and team spirit, qualities significant by their absence in recent weeks. 

They have a two-point lead over the third placed team Zenit St Petersburg. If Real fail to pick up three points against the tractor boys, qualification could be problematic, especially if Juventus indulge in a little Machiavellian plotting in their last two fixtures to make things even more difficult. Schuster, already plagued by injuries, and the president's inability to secure any of the signings he wanted, must travel without the forward Gonzalo Higuain, who picked up an injury against Huelva. Wesley Sneijder is also doubtful. It's all looking a little ominous.

The home fires have been doused pretty thoroughly already. Since last season Real's supremacy in Spain has been just waiting for somebody to point out that it has no foundations. A Barcelona revived by Pep Guardiola, a resurrected Valencia and the steady Villarreal are threatening to eclipse them. Even Atletico Madrid and Sevilla are on their heels. 

It's all falling apart at the Bernabeu, where Schuster lacks a working relationship with either of Real's most powerful figures, the president Ramon Calderon, and the captain for life Raul Gonzalez. With one of them on his side, he might survive. Without either he should be scanning the situations vacant columns already.

Hindsight is pernicious, but Ramon Calderon's decision to sack Fabio Capello looks premature with every decent result Capello achieves with England's motley gang of kids and egos. While Capello has a peerless knack of knocking some sense into players, with his steely glare and uncompromising discipline, Schuster is a prickly and inconsistent figurehead, unlikely to ever get this Real squad singing from the same hymn-sheet. 

In Capello, and the avuncular and popular Vicente Del Bosque, Real had coaches who could unite the team, albeit in very different ways. Schuster's successor needs to be a similarly uncomplicated rallying figure. Real's long-standing interest in Arsène Wenger remains on a steady simmer, with interest increasing now the Arsenal manager appears to be getting disenchanted with life at the Emirates, and the brutal realities of English football. Whether appointing a man who says he doesn't believe in leadership would be the right move in their present circumstances though is open to considerable doubt.
