ENGLISH Premier League managers may have a rare moment of empathy with the wives of their fans this weekend. The FA Cup third round is getting in the way of the serious business of seeking bargains in the January sales.
Harry Redknapp, football's most notorious shopaholic, was grumbling this week about cup ties against Wigan last night, and Burnley next week. At least that left his weekend free for wheeler-dealing. Having restored a modicum of consumer confidence inADVERTISEMENTthe squad he inherited from Juande Ramos, Redknapp is keen to replace many of the players with more familiar faces. His audacious £30million bid for three old pals from Portsmouth – Peter Crouch, Glen Johnson and Jermain Defoe – was rejected, but that will just have honed his appetite for an adventurous spree. As a former West Ham man himself, he knows that the key to Premier League prosperity is signing former Hammers. It helps that they are nearly always available at the right price. 

Redknapp's shopping list is not that unusual in that, for 2009, the must-have items tend to be players with extensive Premier League experience. The consensus has developed that, if the summer is the time for gambling on exotic foreign technicians, January is for enlisting proven scrappers or time-served old reliables. Mid-season is no time for trying to adapt foreign newcomers, most of whom will spend a couple of months just getting used to the weather. 

After all the talk of Manchester City's international wish list, the first player they signed in the window was the less-than-glamorous Wayne Bridge. The most coveted forwards in the top division are the known quantities Defoe, Craig Bellamy and Emile Heskey. And potentially the most transfer interest of all will be in the terminally disgruntled Shay Given, who has been picking the ball out of the Newcastle United net for a remarkable 11 years, behind a series of defenders that, he estimated, cost more than £60million. 

Given might have hoped that his unusual statement of discontent this week would provoke interest from one of the big four. In truth, Manchester United, Chelsea and Liverpool already have better goalkeepers, and Arsene Wenger seems to have a pronounced loyalty to the odd, but engaging, Pamplona portero Manuel Almunia. Given's most likely suitor might be, you guessed it, Redknapp, offering him the opportunity to leave a bunch of presumptuous underachievers living on past glories to join...Tottenham. 

Bellamy, one of football's most enduringly irritating personalities, has somehow managed to enhance his reputation and his value by spending most of the season in West Ham's treatment room. West Ham owner Bjorgulfur Gudmundsson, not sure where his next herring sandwich is coming from, has put everybody up for sale. In the case of some of them, notably the Antipodean answer to Tomas Repka, Lucas Neill, and the gentle aesthete Lee Bowyer, a fee might not even be required.

With Upton Park now resembling the sort of yard-sale you see in the American south when the debt collectors close in, Bellamy, with several previous owners but still serviceable, is one of the more coveted items. Tottenham, naturally, tabled a £6million bid, which seems reasonable, but West Ham are holding out for more. The Catch 22 is that without Bellamy occasionally condescending to drag himself off the treatment table to score, West Ham may be relegated, but if Gudmundsson's financial woes are not relieved by March, West Ham may go into administration, suffering a nine-point penalty and possibly relegation. 

Heskey's comeback over the last year, for club and country, has been the most successful since Take That. The same people who were ridiculing him as a clumsy liability are now cooing over his tactical ingenuity and robust holding-up talents. Mainly because Fabio Capello obviously values him. It's already one of football's cuter ironies that Heskey is a more attractive prospect for England, and for many clubs, than his strike partner in England's 2001 Munich goal glut, Michael Owen. Heskey himself has become far less reticent about his own ability, but it would be a remarkable turnaround if the rumours were vindicated and he did return to Liverpool.

Rather more likely is a reunion with the manager who helped make Heskey's initial reputation at Leicester City. In the last couple of months, Martin O'Neill has had to suffer the ignominy of seeing his team surge up the table, occasionally playing breath-taking counter-attacking football courtesy of the verve of Ashley Young, Gabriel Agbonlahor and James Milner. With the Norwegian colossus John Carew, injured since the end of October, likely to be out for another couple of months at least, O'Neill needs another big lad to lump it long towards rather than having to persist with all this fancy flick, pass, move, score stuff. 

Capello obviously does not value Defoe as much as Heskey, but then Sven-Göran Eriksson wasn't overly fond of him either. Defoe has to content himself with the excessive managerial love of the man who initially signed him for West Ham. Redknapp has calculated that he could get Defoe back to White Hart Lane for a cheapish £5million, because when Portsmouth signed him, they did it on an instalment plan which still has some payments outstanding. The architect of that plan was, of course, Redknapp himself. The man's some kind of genius.
