ARSÈNE Wenger cuts an increasingly aesthetic figure, a man who regards much of the business of Premier League football as regrettable vulgarity. It was not always like that. This, after all, is the man who enthusiastically reinvented Tony Adams, and built a team around Patrick Vieira, neither of whom was frightened of robust pragmatism.

Late period Wenger, though, is disappearing into a metaphysical world where titles are decided in the eye of the beholder rather than in the raw business of goals, results and points. He is disdainful of such irritants as the January transfer window.ADVERTISEMENT

You can imagine his supercilious Alsace sniff at the idea that he has a week to save Arsenal's season, but he should climb off his pedestal and go grubbing around in the football flea-markets, because his Arsenal team cannot prosper on philosophy alone. 

The need for reinforcements became pressing with the injury to Wenger's on-field orchestrator Cesc Fabregas. Wenger should hardly need reminding of what the loss through injury of a key player can mean, as Eduardo Da Silva's broken leg derailed Arsenal's elegant title challenge last season. Wenger has to hold his nose and submit to the travails of grubby commerce. 

Part of the problem is that his shopping list should consist of the sort of straightforward artisans he usually eschews. Without the excellence of Fabregas, Arsenal's midfield is now padded out with ineffective and ephemeral figures like Denilson or Emmanuel Eboue. On Saturday, against Bolton, when it became apparent that Arsenal's midfield wasn't working, Wenger's options were Samir Nasri, Aaron Ramsey and Carlos Vela; three superb players, but masters of invention rather than imposing presences. 

Nobody is expecting Wenger to find another Fabregas in the next two weeks, but it shouldn't be beyond him to find an effective stopgap. The professor of economics bemoans the current fiscal climate, where sterling's weaknesses makes the continent a less appealing market, and English players are both over-priced and exceedingly greedy in their wage demands. 

Wenger's advantage is that he shouldn't be shopping for overpriced stars, but rather for committed water-carriers, who would preferably add a little steel to the midfield. Wenger has been around for enough of the Premier League's history to know that title-winners often fall back on the prosaic presence of a David Batty or Nicky Butt. 

Wenger blanched at the thought of paying around £20 million for an exemplary example of the genre, Villarreal's Marcos Senna, who, at 32, is old enough to be the dad of some of the Arsenal squad. He is still flirting with the notion of signing Andriy Arshavin, presumably on the basis that you can never have quite enough fragile and temperamental playmakers. 

One player on Wenger's list might represent an acceptable compromise between ideology and immediate necessity. Liverpool's Xabi Alonso is technically adept, intelligent, and not afraid to put himself about a bit. His experience and poise could only be assets. Rafael Benitez has shown himself to be inexplicably willing to sell a player who, whenever he plays, looks one of the team's most important cogs. Despite Wenger's misgivings about the whole January window, Alonso could be a season-changing investment.

Wenger's intransigence has meant his side are missing an opportunity. This has been a league of reticent leaders, with Liverpool, Manchester United and Chelsea regularly dropping points. A more focused Arsenal could still be among the leading pack. As it is, assuming Manchester United can make up the stagger in their fixture backlog, Arsenal are chasing Aston Villa, three points ahead, for fourth place, with Liverpool eight ahead at the top. 

On Saturday, Arsenal are away to Hull City. The Premier League's surprise team's bubble has burst and they are plummeting with an alacrity that suggests that, after a few months hanging out with the aristocrats, they are keen to be back among their own kind, scrapping for survival points.

It's a game where the teams will hope to reassert their true identities. Arsenal's promising start to the season went awry when Hull beat them at the Emirates in September, the start of the Humbersiders remarkable accumulation of points. Arsenal need to rediscover fluency and confidence, while Hull will look around for the fighting qualities they have mislaid

If Wenger hasn't bought anybody by then, Hull may be the team to point out the error of his ways. 
