IT'S so rare to encounter anything like poetry in the Premier League, that when it occurs you have to celebrate it. Didier Drogba came out with some stirring blank verse this week when ruminating on his enigmatic form for Chelsea.
"Players are different, like the five fingers on the hand – all different but they shine in different ways."

The layman might not be too impressed with the lines, pointing out that "different" appears in triplicate, and that the shining finger imaADVERTISEMENTgery is a little confused. Being an expert in close textual analysis (English Literature A Level, grade B), I can explain that Didier is hammering out the fact that he is "different". And if you happen to catch a Premier League footballer of Drogba's status and wage-packet off-duty you will realise that each finger does shine in its own way depending on the carat-count of the gold and the facets of the sparklers on each signet ring. 

At his best, Drogba is the most dangerous centre-forward in England (and therefore the world, if you accept the English consensus that if it ain't in the Premier League it ain't worth squat), a veritable Koh-I-Noor set in an Incan emperor's band of gold. Unfortunately, when he occasionally emerged from his sulk to play for Luiz Felipe Scolari this season he was more like the sort of bauble you might pull out of an Aldi Christmas cracker. 

Drogba's excuses, about injuries, "different" (that word again) emotions, and his insistence that he has always been committed to Chelsea, defined disingenuous this week. When he said "I don't have any problem for another player to be more popular than me", he made the classic mistake of denying an accusation before it had been levelled, so drawing attention to it. His desire to be respected, revered and adored was always going to be problematic at Chelsea, where there is no shortage of stellar egos demanding their own share of the spotlight, not least a certain Nicolas Anelka, Drogba's main rival for the centre-forward position.

Anelka and Drogba actually get along well, despite having nothing in common except a sense of persecution, sulky temperaments, barely-veiled contempt for team-mates' deficiencies, sublime first-touch, avaricious agents, quick tempers, rampaging egos... 

Footballers' psychology can usually be equated to that of teenagers. They are similarly indulged and cosseted and express themselves through tantrums, sulks or staying out late with unsuitable friends. 

Drogba took a long while to get over the acrimonious divorce between Mummy Chelsea and Daddy Jose Mourinho. He has spent much of the season wondering whether to go and live with Dad and his new Italian girlfriend, making things impossible at home. The Internazionale deal didn't transpire. Either Jose didn't want responsibility for moody Didier, or some other glitch got in the way . If we can flog this analogy beyond the point of reason, Didier now has a new Dutch stepdad, and seems to be responding to Guus Hiddink's disciplinary streak.

Unfortunately Drogba, not a player with much in the way of foresight, is in something of a no-win situation. Barring a complete Manchester United meltdown, Chelsea will not win the title. If Drogba inspires an impressive run-in with a glut of goals, Chelsea fans will be entitled to blame the lack of a concerted title challenge on his listless start to the season. If he fades away in April and May, they might wonder if it's even worth keeping a 31-year-old with such fragile motivation. 

The only way to emerge with a restored glow is to win the Champions League. That might lay to rest John Terry's recurring nightmares about last May's final, where Drogba wasn't around to take a penalty himself, having been sent off for slapping Nemanja Vidic.

Chelsea's league focus will be tested this afternoon at White Hart Lane, another ground where there is no shortage of players with exalted reputations and limited application. Harry Redknapp, the finest example of the PR man as manager, is still trying to persuade us that survival is a sufficient achievement for his squad.

A cursory examination of this squad would suggest it has the deepest resources of talent of any club outside the top four. Last weekend, Tottenham's bench featured the likes of Roman Pavlyuchenko, Michael Dawson, Carlo Cudicini and David Bentley. Redknapp is so burdened with internationals that he can even afford to send the Mexican prodigy Giovani Dos Santos on loan to Ipswich. 

Tottenham's problem, Redknapp will assure you, is that the talent has rarely been expressed on the pitch. Redknapp's predecessors might grimace at the current form of the suddenly irrepressible Aaron Lennon. 

After the 2006 World Cup, Lennon appeared to have the world at his feet, being anointed as the natural successor to David Beckham in the England team. Three years later Beckham is still ahead of him in the England pecking order. A combination of injury and indolence were to blame. His clubmate Bentley also shot ahead of him in the England reckoning, but recent weeks have seen Lennon return to his best (while Bentley has drifted out of favour). Lennon will return to the England fold later this month, while Redknapp will wonder what went right (while accepting the credit).

Having to deal with enigmas like Drogba and Lennon, you can see why Premier League managers invariably look like death warmed up (that tan is fooling nobody, Phil Brown). Maybe the closest thing to a rationale we are going to get is Drogba's holding up a bling-infested hand to the sun, and admiring the different ways those fingers shine. 
