WHEN it comes to managerial shortlists, we can presume that clubs will now be wary of including iconic former Manchester United midfield hardmen. Bryan Robson's managerial career has been a serious of train-wrecks, Roy Keane's hit the buffers on Thursday, and Paul Ince's may be about to go off the rails. 
If you were listing leaders from the last couple of decades of English football, you'd be hard-pressed to find a more impressive trio, but it has become cruelly apparent that leadership on the field and the complications of command higher up the chaiADVERTISEMENTn can be very different.

It's only a coincidence that Keane's resignation occurred a couple of days before Sunderland were due to visit Old Trafford, but, as the psychiatrists assert, maybe there are no coincidences. It's tempting to think that subconsciously Keane couldn't face taking his flawed team back to the club that became his benchmark for excellence.

Keane's whole demeanour has always been encouraging for amateur shrinks. After he quit the partying early in his career, he has always seemed an isolated individual, driven by personal standards that few could emulate. In recent weeks at Sunderland, as results went awry, Keane's inclinations to head towards his fortress of solitude got in the way of finding a pragmatic solution. Reports filtered back of Keane resorting to intemperate insults after poor performances, of being contactable only by text message (we can speculate that Plyers crp. Stck job up ur blx may have been his final communication).

In the emotive language of football, calling someone a quitter is a powerful insult. As Niall Quinn pointed out though, Keane is his own harshest critic, and if he regards quitting as the only logical reaction, that's exactly what he does, whether it is on the eve of a World Cup finals, or in the middle of a difficult Premier League campaign.

Keane, Robson and Ince did most of their on-the-field communication by example, or uncomplicated exhortation. If a team was struggling, their response was often to get hold of the ball, muscle their way upfield, stick it in the opponent's net and wave a fist in defiance. It takes a while, and a lot of disappointment, to realise that this approach does not work as a manager.

As a player, part of Keane's strength was a disregard, bordering on contempt, for rivals' reputations. Anyone who didn't match his remorseless professional focus was scorned. That was an attitude he needed to lose very quickly if he was to prosper as a manager. He needed to find a quick acceptance of the foibles and failings of his squad. He had to realise that a club like Sunderland is not going to be able to recruit the cream of the Premier League. He had to learn how to make do with the semi-skimmed likes of Anton Ferdinand or El Hadji-Diouf. Instead Keane got to the stage where he couldn't bear to witness his squad's imperfections, declining to turn up for training, when his players needed direction and motivation.

The aloofness might have worked if there had been a conspicuous management structure. For all our fondness for exalting individuals, management is a collegiate exercise, requiring a certain amount of flexibility, knowing which personnel can effectively be trusted to carry out the boss's ideas. If Keane had wanted to learn from the two exceptional managers who nurtured him as a player, he would have realised the importance of having a sidekick who did the donkey work while they concentrated on the genius. Brian Clough had Peter Taylor for most of his career, while Alex Ferguson has always relied on a number two to provide a buffer between him and the players (and latterly the BBC). Having reliable assistants allowed those two maestros to indulge their appetite for ebullience while knowing that the day-to-day stuff was being efficiently conducted.

Lacking a trusted confidant, Keane was a lone wolf, patrolling his technical area in what occasionally looked like an existential crisis. It didn't help that the beard made him increasingly resemble Mahmoud Ahmadinejad about to mete out dire consequences for critics of his regime.

Ince, like Keane, is a difficult character to love and it is apparent the Blackburn fans do not see him as capable of delivering them safely from a relegation struggle. That's part of the cruel learning curve of the Premier League. The depths are the realm of the unpretty but sensible approaches of a Joe Kinnear or Roy Hodgson, veterans who have had most of the idealism knocked out of them by rude reality. 

Ince, and Roy Keane, should take a look at those wrinkled experts of survival at all costs and realise what management at the rough end of the Premier League is all about. Until then, Keane will be taking his dog for plenty of long walks, and Ince might soon have time to get a mutt of his own. 
