CLUBS in a relegation battle can often make some pretty desperate signings. It's unlikely though that any side have ever contemplated splashing 10million on a player's dad.
That's one of the beautiful details that emerged in the most powerful evidence yet of European football's escalating insanity: Manchester City's bid for Kakà. The latest figures suggest that City are offering the likeable Brazilian boy genius 120millADVERTISEMENTion, another 20m will be hurled at the flock of agents moaning ecstatically around the deal, with ten million chucked at Kakà's dad Bosco Leite to keep him sweet.

At the time of writing, it still seems too surreal to imagine that Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite, as he hasn't been called since the day they filled out his birth certificate, could leave Milan for struggling City. In football terms it has zero logic, and Kakà, already overloaded with cash, seems to have an uncommon loyalty to Milan.

You only have to look at some of the buildings that get erected in Abu Dhabi, however, to realise that enough money can break down the strongest streak of common sense.

The average citizen of Abu Dhabi is worth £11million (figures skewed by the fact that the immigrant worker drones who do all the real labour are never accorded citizen status, in case any City fans are worried about their owners' human rights credentials – nope, thought not, they're buying Kakà after all). In a global sense, City's owners are the equivalent of Harry Enfield's "considerably richer than yow" Brummie flaunting it in the face of recently-impoverished Europeans.

Milan might be the plaything of the media mogul and squeaky clean Italian premier Silvio Berlusconi, but even he can't ignore that kind of cash for a single employee. "It is an abstraction," the economist Arsene Wenger noted, "It has no connection to today's world."

Not for the first time, Wenger needs to lighten up a bit. The Kakà deal does not skew the transfer market, because City are attempting to buy the unbuyable. It is extremely unlikely that City's shopping list will affect Wenger's, because he is counting the pennies in Sainsburys and they are in Harrods. And if we assume that the Abu Dhabi crew are not likely to devote all those millions to charitable works in Africa, isn't it better that they invest in our entertainment than in building another seven-star hotel with gold bath-taps?

Other delicious details are not hard to come by. Mark Hughes' tactical plans have more than their own dash of surrealism. Apparently the taciturn Welshman envisages a central-midfield pairing of Kakà and Stephen Ireland. Rarely can any team have featured such a perfect partnership of the sublime and the ridiculous, even if Ireland has been City's most consistent player this season. Ireland, a man who has run out of dead grannies to use as excuses, must be wondering if this is an elaborate wind-up. 

City's relegation escape plan is nothing if not flamboyant, also involving the deployment of Shaun Wright-Phillips and Robinho on the wings, and the yet-to-be-acquired Roque Santa Cruz up front (once the owners have cracked open their loose-change piggy bank for the £18million Blackburn are asking). With that kind of quartet in midfield, you are inclined to feel sorry for Vincent Kompany, the ball-winning defensive midfielder required to do the dirty work in front of an increasingly vulnerable back-four. 

Hughes, a man who has never found it difficult to keep a straight face, says that the Kakà bid is a measured and calculated football decision that "works for us". When, of course, it sounds more like the outcome of a meeting in Abu Dhabi where the owners asked him who he fancied, Hughes cackling nervously, taking another bite of caviare-topped lobster and saying, er, Kakà, Brazilian lad, with Milan...."Then you shall have him," Sheikh Mansour might have responded, gesturing at a minion, "Get me Silvio on the phone, Smithers."

Stern and sensible critics are decrying the City approach, pointing out the failure of the Real Madrid galactico approach, suggesting that the best teams are grown organically. Well maybe, and perhaps carefully-nurtured teams with a Soil Association stamp of approval are better for you in the long run, but just occasionally we want to gorge on spectacularly rich junk food. Admit it, who would you rather watch trying to get themselves out of trouble, City's band of superstar adventurers, or Bolton Wanderers lumping it at Kevin Davies?

And perhaps we should credit the City owners with a little knowledge of the club's history. City fans of a certain age will remember another inspirational goalscoring playmaker nicknamed Kakà whose signing was similarly shocking 30 years ago. Alright, Kazimierz Deyna was only Kakà in Poland; in Manchester he was Kazi, but he was a similarly exotic creature when he arrived. In three injury-blighted years he exuded class at a time when English football was the laughing-stock of Europe. 

Nicknames have significance. It may even turn out to be the deal-breaker when Kakà or his advisers discover that in England we are not accustomed to putting an accent over vowels. There has been meticulous care in Italy to ensure that the player's name is always accompanied by that little stroke over the second 'a' to remind us where the stress lies. This will go by the wayside in England, leaving Kakà as plain old Kaka, the vernacular, in most Latin languages, for s**t. Now, is that kind of humiliation worth, oh, hold on, half a million quid a week? Silly question.
