REALITY checks come in very different shapes in the 2009 Premier League. For Manchester City, it came in the chastening form of Kaka's succinct refusal to swallow the fantasy being pitched to him by that least self-conscious of marketing hucksters, Eastlands executive chairman Garry Cook.
For Newcastle, it came in the figures that revealed Mike Ashley had lost £34million in a year that also saw him lose a couple of managers, any lingering goodwill on Tyneside and any chance of a buyer for his struggling club.

If these clubs' financADVERTISEMENTial status is about as polarised as it gets in the top division, their football status is roughly similar. City sit 11th in the Premier League, with Newcastle in 14th, which doesn't sound too bad, until you recall that they are, respectively, four and two points off bottom place.

After the merciful interlude of an FA Cup round in which neither were involved, they meet at Eastlands on Wednesday in a match which neither club should spin as anything but a crucial relegation battle.

Relegation is unthinkable for both. Ashley's Newcastle budgets ominously take Premier League revenues for granted. City are already the subject of considerable scorn, because of the inevitable gulf between their boasts and their present status. An instant injection of unlimited amounts of cash does not always ensure immediate success. 

At the time of writing, City's January acquisitions were unremarkable except for the inflated fees involved. Wayne Bridge and Craig Bellamy suffer from over-familiarity. If they were going to be world-beaters, we would have noticed by now. Luiz Felipe Scolari and Gianfranco Zola have hardly been wailing in anguish at the prospect of losing their services. Nigel de Jong looks like an astute purchase who will bring balance and strength to an over-artistic midfield. For a Dutchman he is surprisingly unelaborate. It looks like manager Mark Hughes added him in as a parenthetical, but sensible, side-dish while Cook was chasing Brazilian superstars. 

Newcastle can only dream of being able to recruit Dutch internationals. Their January midfield target was Barry Ferguson. Perhaps Ferguson's extensive collection of operation scars or the transfer fee put them off, or maybe it was that £34million deficit, but instead of buying a current Rangers player in the transfer window, they have contented themselves with signing an out-of-contract former Ibrox luminary in Peter Lovenkrands. The Dane was released by Schalke, and could make his debut against City. It would be the rosiest of optimists who would envision him as the key player to lift Newcastle above the relegation melee. 

It's difficult not to feel sympathy for two managers whose authority and ambitions are inevitably undermined by their owners' agendas. Hughes has a respectable pedigree in Premiership and international football. His modus operandi is to find a small cadre of players he trusts, augment them with gifted youngsters, and instil a collective cohesion that eventually brings results. Cook, entrusted with City's vision by the Abu Dhabi owners, has little patience with this modest approach, and has been unenthusiastic in his assessment of Hughes. The Welshman, if he wants to stay in a job, must try to cling to his own principles while paying lip-service to the surreal notion of attracting the world's best players to a struggling club. 

Kinnear is little better than a janitor entrusted with the keys of a crumbling property that can't attract a buyer. His job amounts to ensuring that not too many windows get smashed. To torture the analogy further, much of his job involves trying to keep control over troublesome tearaways like Joey Barton, Charles N'Zogbia and Andy Carroll. 

It would take a lot to cheer up Mike Ashley these days. Perhaps he can take a few crumbs of consolation in the knowledge that the annual wage bill of £70million that is crippling the club is likely to come down considerably in the next few months. One of the biggest earners, Michael Owen, seems extremely unlikely to linger beyond the summer. Every other Newcastle player with the remnants of a reputation must be weighing up exit strategies.

For a start, City could apply their most effective tactic to Wednesday's fixture today or tomorrow by buying Newcastle's first (and often only) line of resistance, Shay Given. That would be a particularly piquant example of the potency of the Abu Dhabi coffers.

Unfortunately for City, the opportunity to buy points in such a facile manner ends next weekend.
