MAYBE over a glass of post-match Rioja after the Champions League tie on Tuesday night, Rafael Benitez and Juande Ramos can decide who had the worst press in England. Ramos' barrels of bile were at least concentrated into a short space of time. Benitez has had to suffer the slings of scepticism and arrows of antipathy for four seasons, even while transforming Liverpool from moribund has-beens to European giants once more.
Benitez's misfortune was to raise expectations a little too swiftly by winning the Champions League in his first season, before he had a chance to build a team to his own specifications. He was ridiculed for his failure to find a settled team and stADVERTISEMENTick to it, although he is hardly alone in his modern belief that the most effective sides are those permed from a reliable pool of at least 18 squad members, adjusted according to the specific demands of a given match. 

Much of the criticism of Benitez stems from his failure to conform to the expected stereotypes of a manager in English football. He doesn't do incandescent rage. His criticisms of officials and opponents tend to be coolly rational. Nor does he wax lyrical about the stellar performances of his own stars like Steven Gerrard or Fernando Torres, offering a dispassionate assessment of their abilities. He is a consummate technician, suspicious of more human responses. 

Certain Liverpool players have been slow to adjust to his cold methodology, although they have come to respect it. Steven Gerrard and Yossi Benayoun both mentioned Benitez's lack of exultation about the Israeli's winner in the Bernabeu in the first leg against Real Madrid, and failure to even congratulate the scorer. They brought it up, though, in the context of the manager's single-minded focus on the next target, his unwillingness to be satisfied with a temporary success. 

Liverpool's advantage going into Tuesday's second leg at Anfield should be sufficient to see them into the quarter-final, because this is a competition Benitez seems to understand implicitly. The fine margins and tactical complexities have suited him, even if that Istanbul success in 2005 was a crazy roller-coaster. 

That lack of essential logic is his biggest problem with the Premier League, although it's not one he finds it easy to articulate. His logician's mind protests about how a Middlesbrough team could outplay and defeat his team one week, and get slaughtered by Tottenham four days later. You can feel his bafflement and frustration, watching the title decided by a bizarre couple of months in which his side drew a series of mundane domestic fixtures, while Manchester United won a similar series by a single goal. 

After Real, next Saturday lunchtime sees Benitez take Liverpool to Old Trafford for a showdown that no longer appears decisive. If Liverpool outplay United and win, as they did earlier in the season at Anfield, it's likely to be Pyrrhic victory given United's lead and their capacity for grinding out results far more ruthlessly than Liverpool. 

Liverpool's chances of stopping the United quintuple campaign are more realistic in Europe, where they are in a better position going into this week's ties, and have as much experience as United of contesting the later stages. 

Real Madrid's rally in La Liga stalled on Saturday with a 1-1 draw in the Madrid derby, while Barcelona extended their lead at the top. Ramos' impressive streak of results shouldn't be enough to challenge Barcelona's progress to the title, but he could increase his already considerable esteem at the Bernabeu if he can pull off a miracle at Anfield. 

The Spanish press, who had Benitez marked down as a wily pragmatist long before he took the Liverpool job, are highly sceptical about Ramos' chances of outthinking the Liverpool boss. Instead Real must hope for one of those incidents, an error, a slice of genius, that goes beyond the predictable or the planned; the obvious example being John-Arne Riise's calamity against Chelsea that cost Liverpool a place in the final last season. 

In that context, Real's Champions League ambitions might eventually falter on the club's decision to register Lassana Diarra for this competition rather than the in-form Dutch international Klaas-Jan Huntelaar. Tuesday's game is likely to need the intervention of an opportunistic goalscorer more than the energy of a combative midfielder. Huntelaar may find himself watching, scowling and murmuring "told you so".
