WHEN the whole expensive project threatens to blow up in your face, call for Harry Red Adair. The charismatic Bagpuss lookalike who made a midnight flit from Portsmouth to Tottenham Hotspur on Saturday is Premier League football's survival specialist. If he can rescue Portsmouth from the seemingly inevitable drop, as he did a couple of seasons ago, surely saving a club with the resources of Spurs should be within his powers?

The Tottenham chairman Daniel Levy is prepared to bet £5 million in compensation to Portsmouth (on top of the cost of Juande Ramos's golden adios) on that very outcome. The choice of Redknapp, though, suggests Levy isn't keen on throwing high stakes ADVERTISEMENTonto the table in January. If any manager can ensure canny fiscal wheeler-dealing in the window it is the former used-car dealer.

A significant element of Redknapp's success as a manager has been down to his ability to turn back the clock on some flashy vehicles identified by less frugal owners as ready for scrap. If you wonder why David James is the best English goalkeeper in the Premier League, and Sol Campbell one of the best defenders, look no further than the motivational powers of Redknapp. 

Redknapp's challenge at Spurs will be to sift through a gilded squad and identify which players will be valuable in the battles to come and which will be expensive liabilities. One of his first priorities will be to secure a goalscorer. It's a pity Spurs allowed Redknapp to take Jermain Defoe to Portsmouth last season. 

It had been assumed that Redknapp would have seen out his career in the comfort zone of Portsmouth where the team is over-achieving, the fans worship him, and he is a short commute from his home on the south coast. Accepting a job in London, though, reveals that Redknapp still has a certain degree of ambition, still feels he has to prove himself.

Despite the chirpy persona, Redknapp is a sensitive soul, with the misfortune that his wounded pride always reminds you of Arthur Daley caught out in some scam. His fellow managers, and players, offer him considerable respect. However, he has never been considered for one of the top managerial posts, while Panorama and a police investigation destroyed any prospects of the England job (a role in which his man-management skills and PR acumen would have been significant assets).

His problem, apart from the legendary cupidity delineated devastatingly in Tom Bower's book Broken Dreams, was that he is an unfashionable Englishman in an era of flamboyant foreigners. Tottenham, fleeing from the failure of the new, have looked for the managerial equivalent of comfort food. 

From Redknapp's perspective, Portsmouth are likelier trophy candidates, but he grew up revering Tottenham as one of English football's greatest clubs. As a young professional he arrived in football in an era dominated by the tactically-advanced Spurs double team of 1961. That is the bar of expectation set by even those Spurs supporters who may have only heard of Danny Blanchflower from their grandfathers. 

Redknapp hit the ground running, giving the team-talk and patrolling the touchline against Bolton yesterday. That was the start of a daunting first week taking in the North London derby at the Emirates on Wednesday night followed by Liverpool's visit to White Hart Lane on Saturday. Those are the challenges that persuaded him to accept the job.

On his second coming at Portsmouth he had to remould the side to his own preferred shape fairly radically. At Tottenham he can hardly complain about the talent at his disposal, but the problem will be gauging players' attitudes. There is only one manager in the Premier League better at this than Redknapp: his good friend Sir Alex Ferguson. 

He will be aware that Ramos was sacked not just for results but for the escalating scepticism from the likes of David Bentley, Jonathan Woodgate and Luka Modric. Redknapp won't tolerate that kind of sniping, but his character and charisma can forge the team spirit that Ramos signally lacked. 

There can be no egos in relegation battles. The arrival of Redknapp on the Tottenham training ground should make it clear to the players that this is exactly Tottenham's plight. Like alcoholism, admitting you have a problem is the first step to recovery. In Redknapp they have a formidable mentor. 
