WITH no apologies to Mancunians, the two greatest English clubs of the 20th century were Arsenal and Liverpool. Arsenal established themselves as football's aristocrats in the 1930s and returned sporadically to the heights before offering the most sustained challenge to Liverpool's hegemony in the 1980s. The Anfield team put a headlock on the domestic title from 1977 onwards, and secured four European Cups in that period.
Since the advent of the Premiership, Liverpool, and latterly Arsenal have dropped away from the peaks: Scousers anguished by the dominance of their neighbours to the east, Arsenal recently eclipsed by the success of the nouveau-riche upstarts from the King's Road. 

Tomorrow afternoon's game arrives in the wake of a supposed revival of both clubs' title aspirations. Although both are unbeaten in the Premier League, Arsenal's rebirth is by far the more convincing as they look down from the summit having dropped only two points all season. Liverpool's promising start is already petering out into mediocrity and tired excuses. 

Theirs' was a compelling rivalry towards the end of the last century, coloured often by polarised approaches to how the game should be played. The intriguing power struggle across a couple of decades was bookended by the epic 1971 FA Cup Final and the titanic league decider in 1989. 

Both games were won by Arsenal, the former through Charlie George's majestic double-sealing strike, the second through Michael Thomas's cool dink. The managers were, in 1971 Bertie Mee and Bill Shankly, names that ought to be printed in sepia ink, and in 1989 George Graham and Kenny Dalglish. 

Three out of four of the bosses were Scots, and the sides back then also featured a liberal sprinkling of Caledonian talent. Tomorrow afternoon at Anfield you'll find not a hint of Scottish DNA in either side although Togo, Ukraine, Norway, Spain, and Brazil will all be represented. The only Scottish involvement will be the small matter of the £298 million Liverpool's co-owners borrowed from the Royal Bank Of Scotland to finance their acquisition. 

The ideological balance has shifted as well. If Mee and Graham were astute pragmatists, Shankly and even that dour sourpuss Dalglish (back then) inclined towards a romantic notion of positive football. This week Arsenal gave us one of the greatest displays of attacking football ever seen in the Champions League and won 7-0, while Liverpool made a craven attempt at a familiar containing and counter-attacking game, and lost 2-1. 

Of course it would be inaccurate to depict Arsene Wenger as a starry-eyed dreamer and Rafael Benitez as a kind of Castilian Don Revie, but their teams are presently poles apart in terms of style and effectiveness. 

With Martin Jol now put out of his misery, there is a vacancy for a Premier League manager to describe as beleaguered, and Benitez is a strong candidate to fill it. With the Champions League campaign looking forlorn, one of those heavily mortgaged co-owners, Tom Hicks, judged it the time to point out that the manager's job is to win the title, having been given plenty of pocket money to spend on pricey goodies over the summer. There are signs that Benitez's meticulous and uncompromising approach are cutting against the rather deep grain of the Anfield football culture. In the distinctly fortuitous victory over Everton he withdrew Steven Gerrard with the explanation that he was playing with too much passion and not enough brain. 

Without wanting to wander too deep into Boris Johnson territory "too much passion and not enough brain" could almost be the city of Liverpool's civic motto. It is difficult for an outsider to comprehend or work with. Liverpool fans look at Gerrard and Benitez and know which one they identify with, which one personifies the spirit of Liverpool football club. It's a battle Benitez can never win, and it would be advisable for him to make a strategic retreat from that position sooner rather than later. Instead he needs to find a way to shackle passion to the team cause. 

In which case he should have enough humility to learn from Arsenal's example. Arsene Wenger acquires players when they are young and malleable, and forges a personal loyalty that is immensely effective. Cesc Fabregas may be constantly lured by the dangled offers from Barcelona or Real Madrid, but in his rational moments he appreciates that nobody but Wenger could have made him the player that he is. The level-headed 18-year-old Theo Walcott appears likely to be the next beneficiary of Wenger's unique approach. 

Wenger buys smart as well. Aleksandr Hleb was a key acquisition, and the carioca Croatian Eduardo Da Silva will provide goals when he is included, and, when he isn't, will pressurise Emmanuel Adebayor into raising his game. 

Arsenal's squad might not be quite deep enough to weather an injury crisis or the fixture pile-up in the depths of winter, but for now Wenger's cadets are playing gloriously entertaining football, scoring freely, and the manager has still found time to humiliate Jens Lehmann. As we never said about George Graham, what's not to love?
