IT IS one of football's more persuasive truisms that great players do not great managers make. Wednesday witnessed the greatest of them all Diego Maradona taking his first tentative step into managing his national team in what will be a risky gamble. If only because of his end-of-game kisses with his players. You rarely see Sir Alex Ferguson bestowing a lingering smacker on a delighted Paul Scholes. Maradona may still have a lot to learn.

Johan Cruyff's achievements from the bench were respectable, although hobbled somewhat by his refusal to compromise his principles or conceal his disdain for players' opinions. He was also the only manager who ever looked at the languid goal-poacherADVERTISEMENTGary Lineker and thought he had the makings of a workhorse right-winger.

England legends Bobby Moore and Bobby Charlton were abject failures as managers. Billy McNeill was okay, the more talented footballer Danny McGrain less so. The jury remains hung on Kenny Dalglish. Gianfranco Zola, popularly regarded as Chelsea's all-time great, is presently having the smile wiped off his face on a daily basis at West Ham. Tottenham genius Glenn Hoddle found his mouth too much of a liability as a manager.

The suspicion is that truly exceptional players find it difficult to adjust to the pragmatism of management, are slow to accept their players' deficiencies and work with them (whereas a heroically mediocre player like Harry Redknapp is adept at bringing out the best in the sort of journeymen he can understand). 

That probably won't prevent Newcastle United from anointing, sooner or later, their next Messiah, Alan Shearer as the manager at St James' Park. Part of football's appeal is our ability to see inevitable disasters approaching from a long way away. 

If he is the Messiah, Shearer has spent rather longer than the requisite 40 days in the wilderness (Match Of The Day) listening to the tempting whispers of Satan (Alan Hansen, crowing about how much Morrisons are paying him). This week Robert Lee (the donkey Shearer plans to ride up the Gallowgate while the Toon faithful strew his path with palms, or stottie cakes) made it known that the Lord is ready for management. 

Pontius Pilate, okay, let's drop the creaking analogy, Mike Ashley must be sighing in exasperation. No sooner has he crucified Kevin Keegan than another semi-divine Newcastle legend starts agitating for the job. 

Ashley had hoped that Shearer would not be his problem but that of the mug, sorry, discerning investor, who eventually buys the club. If that ever happens. Ashley has been advised by friends and enemies alike (the balance is heavily weighted towards the latter) that if he wants to sell Newcastle he has to ask a more realistic price. Perhaps he could emulate Marks and Spencer and have a one-day only 20 per cent discount. Crueller cynics might suggest that Newcastle's image is closer to that of Woolworths, a household name held in some derision, with a selection policy that could be summarised as Pick 'n' Mix. In which case the whole shebang is worth a quid.

Ashley, tubby carpetbagger that he is, deserves some credit for installing Joe Kinnear as a damage-limitation stopgap. Kinnear, articulacy problems aside, has steered Newcastle away from the looming iceberg and held a steady course. Kinnear's brand of no-nonsense make-and-mend direction has kept Newcastle as a viable Premier League product, even if they are still occupying one of the relegation places.

Strip away the unwarranted assumptions, and you could argue that Newcastle presently have the manager they deserve. They are sharing a lowly league placing with Blackburn and Tottenham, similar clubs with delusions of grandeur. Under Kinnear their results have been middling-to-decent, with an impressive win against Aston Villa balanced by a woeful defeat at Fulham. Still they are only two points off Sunderland in 11th, and have the consolation of knowing that Steve Bruce's Wigan, just above them, have already been selected as the first club to be relegated by refereeing decisions alone. With Tony Mowbray destined to take his fine principles and West Brom right back where they came from, that leaves only one relegation slot to escape. 

Kinnear started the week angling for a longer contract, and ended it by swiftly backtracking and saying he was happy with the month-by-month set-up. He has to strike the right balance between knowing that no other Premier League club would dream of employing him, and not wanting to appear to be Ashley's doormat. At least this afternoon he can afford to relax a little. Everybody expects Newcastle to be ripped to shreds by Chelsea. Anything better than a resounding defeat adds a morsel to Kinnear's line of credit.

The travelling fans of course will be baying their maudlin Geordie chants of 'She-ra', in the forlorn belief that the creosote king will lead them into the land of milk and honey (or at least a tilt at the Carling Cup next season).

Such fantasies are Keegan's fault. For a couple of seasons in the last century he was the impresario of a compelling circus at St James' Park, offering cavalier football, the philosophy of we're going to score one more than you (although it was often three or four), title challenges, emotional outbursts, dreams and expectations. 

His legacy was a fervid fan-base refusing to accept that those years were a brief blip in an otherwise unbroken sequence of provincial mediocrity. Oh what the hell, we could all enjoy another bleak farce on Tyneside: 'She-Ra! She-Ra! She-Ra!'

Meanwhile, Kinnear has issued an invitation to Shearer to begin his coaching career under him.

Shearer is seen by many as the man-in-waiting for the job at St James' Park if a new owner comes in, and has been touted as the next boss ever since his retirement in 2006. However, Kinnear has insisted he would be delighted if the 38-year-old, who has combined his coaching studies with his media work in recent years, wanted to cut his teeth at the club he served with such distinction for a decade as a player.

Kinnear said: "I have the utmost respect for Shearer. The door is always open and if he is listening to this interview, he is more than welcome to learn his trade here. I would be delighted if he wanted to come here two days a week and see for himself what football is all about."
