THE souvenir shop opposite the Boca Juniors stadium is dominated by Diego Armando Maradona merchandise. When I was there a couple of years ago, the assistant told me that visiting Scots always snap up the T-shirts showing Maradona's hand rising above Peter Shilton's disbelieving grimace 22 years ago in the World Cup quarter-final. The text cites Maradona's line about that goal confirming the existence of a God who smiled on Argentina. 
Maybe He does, but occasionally you wonder if the deities are having a collective chuckle at the proud nation's expense, with Maradona their obliging jester.

The greatest footballer the world has ever seen (don't give me Pele; a couple of exemplarADVERTISEMENTy World Cups equal Maradona, a thousand tepid exhibition matches don't) would be assured of a tumultuous welcome wherever he started his career as a manager. Hampden, the stadium where he scored his first international goal 29 years ago, will do him proud, possibly because Scots, starved of footballing genius of their own for too long, are quick to appreciate it.

Cool, rational heads though can't help but suspect that the nation with a group of players that deserve to be the favourites for the 2010 World Cup may have hobbled their chances by putting the greatest living Argentine in charge. For the next couple of years, everything about this team will have to be sound-tracked by that ditty from Evita: Oh What A Circus. 

It didn't have to be this way. If Alfio Basile had to go after an indifferent start to the World Cup qualifying campaign, it would have seemed logical to appoint the Olympic team coach Sergio Batista, one of Maradona's old water-carriers from the 1986 side. Batista's team successfully defended their gold medals, with a team that looked like embryonic world champions. Before the Olympics Maradona had dropped heavy hints that he wanted to be boss in Beijing. They were ignored at the time, but the Argentine authorities called his bluff when Basile departed, and appointed Maradona, his charisma trumping Batista's competence. 

The crucial question is whether this talented generation of Argentine footballers will be inspired by Maradona's presence or cowed by it. The supplementary query is when Maradona's lack of dug-out experience will be found out. Not if, but when. His track record is risible, amounting to short-lived spells with Racing Club and Mandiyu De Corrientes in the mid-90s, both swiftly ended after poor results. Nor will it be possible for him to serve as a mere figurehead. He has been so opinionated about Argentine football that it wouldn't be credible for him to keep his mouth shut now. 

It helps that his squad of predominantly European-based players has some of the world's most illustrious talents, even if Lionel Messi will be missing on Wednesday. Barcelona don't want their fragile superstar risking himself against irreverent Scottish defenders. Club commitments with Boca Juniors also explain the absence of Juan-Roman Riquelme. The over-age captain of the Olympic team, and the playmaker under Basile, Riquelme's contribution could be the key to how Argentina progress over the next two years. 

At 30, still carrying an aura of being the next Maradona, the players' relationship with the new boss is a little ambiguous. Like Maradona, Riquelme likes to see the team revolve around him. He's the top scorer in World Cup qualifying, and Maradona needs his complete commitment. 

If Messi is likely to be the key forward in the World Cup, Maradona also has his son-in-law Sergio Agero of Atletico Madrid, a player who has been the most exciting striker in the Spanish league for the last couple of seasons. German Denis and Ezequiel Lavezzi could also feature on Wednesday, two forwards currently with Napoli and therefore likely to feel the full force of approbation from the man who brought the southern club the Serie A scudetto. As will Carlos Tevez, a player who will relish the opportunity to restate his credentials with the national team after losing a little lustre at Manchester United. 

Looking past Riquelme and the venerable Javier Zanetti, Maradona has already identified Javier Mascherano as his leader. Mascherano deserves a considerable share of the credit for Liverpool becoming credible Premier League title contenders. Mascherano though is the ultimate pragmatist, a player who relishes tactical discipline, precise plans, positional clarity. He gets that from Rafael Benitez; Maradona's instructions may be vaguer. 

It is not the bravest prediction ever to suggest that this Maradona adventure will end in tears. It will be compelling entertainment along the way though. It might even begin with a few moist eyes on Wednesday when he hears the Hampden roar of acclaim as he raises that famous fist.
