Sadly the likelihood is that this Ashes series will mark cricket's zenith, and when the Australians have gone home to their tinnies, barbies and (in Shane Warne's case) broad-minded sheilas, the sport will revert to its default status as a pleasing buzz behind the hubbub of football. 

It won't help that future Tests will be broadcast on Sky, the domain of the sports specialist audience, rather than in the broadly inclusive embrace of Channel 4. That unusual sense of national involvement that has gripped the English for the last month will move on next summer to the football World Cup in Germany. Always assuming that Sven-Goran Eriksson's overconfident superstars can manage to qualify. 

It's advisable then to view this credulity-straining Ashes series as a discrete one-off, an unrepeatable show-home demonstration of the lingering allure of cricket. Enjoy the last match at the Oval from Thursday, because we shall not see its like again. 

If the broad picture is compelling, the human details are just as rewarding. Psychologists will tell you that your choice of insults reflects your own fears. Hence Australians' habitual use of the adjective "whinging" to describe the English reveals their own propensity for strident complaint. 

This after all is a nation that still feels a sense of collective outrage at the memory of a few bouncers delivered in an Ashes series seventy years ago. 

So all England cackled in glee when Ricky Ponting was dismissed by an adept substitute at Trent Bridge, and stomped to the gate with his little ball of a face clenched in puerile anger, hurling abuse at the pavilion. All England basked in love for Michael Vaughan when the England captain chose that moment to send on a second substitute. 

That was a brilliant (and very Antipodean) piece of one-upmanship that showed England are not going to be cowed by the reputation of the opposition. That moment, rather than the scrambled nature of the victory in Nottingham, gave credence to the belief that the English could win the Ashes. 

England have found out and undermined nearly all the Australian side. There are two, perhaps three exceptions. Glenn McGrath's injuries have excused him any culpability in the Australian decline, and he may still turn the series at the Oval. Otherwise England can only fear the implacable spirit of the Australian bowlers Brett Lee and Shane Warne. 

Warne's continued genius almost won the Ashes at Trent Bridge. He and Lee, already heroic with the ball in their hand, have got into the habit of sighing at the failures of their own batsmen, and providing swaggering innings with the bat to make their team's totals at least respectable. 

They have done so with the joy and verve of great sportsmen. It is delightful to watch the way Lee laughs and winces through the assault of the England fast bowlers, the easy grace with which he acknowledges them at the end of the match, and the pent-up emotion of his reaction when he uprooted Andrew Flintoff's stumps late in the fourth Test, when an Australian victory still seemed possible. 

WARNE'S performances have been an extended valedictory parade, full of guile, competitiveness and wit. He sticks his tongue in his cheek ruefully when he sends down an inadvertent full toss, then runs it leisurely round that zinc-coated lower lip while he ponders how to flatter Kevin Pietersen into thinking he can read the next delivery. 

Lee and Warne will believe that the last session at Trent Bridge showed the way to save the Ashes at the Oval, and they might be right. 

Of course, it's indicative of the defiantly insane nature of cricket that the really serious fans, those desperate for England to secure the Ashes, would be ecstatic if the Oval Test was rained off. The rest of us would settle for a match about half as enthralling as those at Edgbaston, Old Trafford and Trent Bridge. 

Given the elderly status of many cricket fans, anything more tense could turn out to be literally heart-stopping.
