SPARE a thought for Victor Gonzalez, the latest addition to Liverpool's Spanish legion. The midfielder arrived from Deportivo La Coruna at the weekend to find a note on the door telling him to make himself at home, and sorry but everyone else was at the spontaneous street party.
Liverpool fans, just as they were getting used to an atmosphere of professionalism and calm consistency at Anfield, have been offered a development that has more drama, passion, sentiment and raw excitement than a Sophocles summer season. I refer of course to the possibility that Robbie Fowler will be running out in a Liverpool shirt once more, against Birmingham City on Wednesday. 

Since the outlandish news of Fowler's signing broke on Friday, you know that half of Merseyside has formed itself into a giant, lachrymose Scouse sewing bee, creating the mightiest banner the Reds will ever witness, emblazoned with the legend "The Second Coming". 

We already had an inkling of Rafael Benitez's genius. This signing merely confirms it. It is simply a no-lose situation. Benitez treats every one of the club's pounds as if it is his own and got the striker for nothing. In addition, by one of English football's blackly comic twists, part of Fowler's £25,000 a week salary will be paid by Leeds United, as part of an arrangement he made when he left them for Manchester City. Liverpool are paying relative peanuts for the 30-year-old. Although given Fowler's delight at returning to Liverpool he would probably have been happy to pay his own wages, given that he has a property portfolio the size of the Duke of Westminster's. Already forgiven for being the man who sold Michael Owen, Benitez has become the man who bought back the most popular Liverpool footballer since Kenny Dalglish. 

The response on the fans' web discussions distills down to ecstatic variations on "made up", along with touching gratitude to Benitez and a suggestion that he signs Dalglish and Ian Rush as well. 

There are doubts about Fowler's form, although Benitez seems more impressed by his attitude. Sentiment is unlikely to have played much of a part, although the manager realises that passion for the club can make up for Fowler's prolonged absences from Premiership action. He will have glimpsed promising flourishes of the old Fowler in January. Since returning from injury, he scored a hat-trick against Scunthorpe in the FA Cup and then killed off Manchester United with a decisive third goal two weeks ago. 

Sharing every Liverpool fan's hatred of United, Fowler celebrated that goal with a spread palm to signify Liverpool's five European Cup wins (Fowler was with the fans in Istanbul to witness the fifth). That love for the red shirt can only be fully matched by Steven Gerrard and Jamie Carragher of Benitez's current squad. 

Of course it wasn't the first gesture to punctuate Fowler's career. Indeed he seems to have spent his time on the field with an angel on one shoulder and a devil on the other. The former persuaded him to openly support the striking Liverpool dockers (hence endearing himself to the fans) and refuse to profit from a bad penalty decision (hence endearing himself to FIFA). The devil persuaded him to snort a touchline cocaine-style in a match against Everton, and indulge in some homophobic banter with happily married Graeme Le Saux. 

Benitez isn't a manager to tolerate such antics, but he appreciates that Fowler's irrepressible personality can be an asset. Importantly Fowler is desperate to play for Liverpool and to prove himself, in marked contrast to the lackadaisical and troubled Djibril Cisse. The Frenchman was cautioned by the police for assaulting his pregnant wife at the weekend. Liverpool fans already see the signing of Fowler as the end of the line for Cisse. 

Fowler will find a very different Liverpool to the club he left in 2001. In fact, all that will be familiar will be the roar that greets him from the Liverpool fans if he takes the field on Wednesday. That will be an moment laden with the sort of emotion rarely witnessed in sport.
