Despite glittering careers, maturity continues to elude high-profile duo

PLAYERS we love to hate could be a series that would last substantially longer than this quaint old medium of newsprint. The English Premier League probably has the highest concentration of antipathy anywhere in the world, not unrelated to its wages.

On a poll of unpopularity, Ashley Cole v Cristiano Ronaldo would be as closely-matched a contest as any they have ever staged on the wing in a Chelsea v Manchester United match. Both managed to fuel fresh outpourings of bile on Wednesday night. 

The great thing about the fixed-fine system is that we don't have to get mealy-mouthed about the legal implications of presuming guilt. Ashley Cole, under the influence of alcohol, swore repeatedly at police officers outside a ghastly-sounding Kensington establishment called Collections. 

So far so unedifying. Lets put it into a sporting context. This occurred three days before an FA Cup quarter final in which Chelsea play Coventry. On Tuesday Chelsea are away to Juventus in the Champions League, before resuming their Premier League campaign against Manchester City the following Sunday. Chelsea's new manager, Guus Hiddink, has already pointed out that the squad lack fitness. Hiddink comes from a country where swearing at policeman is hardly heinous, but he will question the professionalism of a player who was drunk a few days before such a demanding sequence of fixtures. 

Not unlike many Premier League footballers, Cole has been cocooned from reality for most of his life. I saw Cole making his Premier League debut for Arsenal nearly nine years ago, and in a rare moment of prescience, suggested England's left-back problems were solved. Not that it was a particularly bold prediction: Cole was a precociously gifted footballer. As such he soon received the sort of praise and wealth that can turn the head of any young man except Theo Walcott. 

The backlash began after Cole, his ambitious (i.e greedy) agent, and the opportunistic Jose Mourinho engineered a move to Chelsea. The Arsenal fans' derisory nickname of "Cashley" was exacerbated by Cole's crass lifestyle accessories, and a dumb autobiography that seemed to have been written by a ghost with a grudge, or at least a determination to make Cole appear as shallow, venal and self-righteous as possible. 

After all this it is still possible to feel sympathy for Cole. He is the victim of constant persecution by tabloids. After he sued two newspapers for suggesting he was gay in 2006, the papers have pursued a vendetta of highlighting every one of his heterosexual liaisons. 

It is his misfortune that his wife has become a popular heroine, mostly by being photogenic, sympathetic and having an infinitely more adept PR team. As Cheryl becomes a nation's darling, Ashley's villainy has to escalate to maintain the precarious balance. Cole, possessor of a genuinely rare talent, has been eclipsed by a reality-show mediocrity with a nice smile. No wonder he has the urge to curse a copper (in his world they are just referees with helmets, anyway)

Cristiano Ronaldo has had a similar trial by tabloid in the past, and a not dissimilar track record of sleazy sexual indiscretion. This has diminished in the last couple of years, either because the player has cleaned up his act under his manager's influence, or the papers are not pursuing him with such vigour, under persuasion from his manager (when pondering Sir Alex Ferguson's powers you are reminded of the catch-line from the Channel 4 David Peace adaptation, Red Riding: "We're from the north, we do what we like."). 

Critical attention has reverted to Ronaldo's on-field antics. The latest of them came on Wednesday night, when he was involved in an altercation with the Newcastle player Steven Taylor. Afterwards all the papers reported an exchange in the tunnel in which Ronaldo suggested Taylor was a "shit" player and Taylor responded by calling Ronaldo "ugly". This Wildean repartee could have been made up, seeing as the players deny it, and there are no credible witnesses. It appears to be a fictional incident created to illustrate a broader truth, that Ronaldo provokes the dislike of fellow professionals with his demeanour. 

Arsene Wenger, auditioning for a job as a pundit now that his days of winning titles appear to be numbered, spoke about Ronaldo's "arrogance being provocative". He might have added that little is accidental in a Manchester United side. Ronaldo's showboating, his tricks and palpable contempt for opponents are often used as valuable tools, provoking rash and intemperate challenges, and winning consequent free-kicks and penalties. If Ronaldo's personality is antagonising opponents, Ferguson will be the last to tell him to tone it down. 

Provocation comes with its own attendant risks of course. In Ronaldo's case, one furious challenge may catch him before his fleeting feet can escape, and leave him with a serious injury. It should also be noted that his own response to constant attritional assault from opponents isn't always controlled. At least twice this season he could have been dismissed for petulant retaliation if the referees had spotted it. Wily opponents will exploit that short fuse, especially in Europe where a red shirt does not intimidate referees so substantially. 

Meanwhile, if his arrogance on the field is too valuable to give up, Ronaldo might at least take a lesson in personal standards of behaviour from team-mates like Ryan Giggs and Paul Scholes. For most of their career they have been infinitely more talented than most opposing players. For all of their careers they wore their achievements lightly and showed their adversaries respect. They are mature professionals.

Maturity may be one achievement that is beyond Cole and Ronaldo. 
