SO WHERE’S the catch? West Ham fans, accustomed to see their dreams fade and die like bubbles heading towards Romford, punctuated their elation yesterday with any number of conspiracy theories.
When the news first broke on Tevez’s website, the immediate suspicion on the West Ham web forum was that this was an elaborate hoax perpetrated by some computer- literate Spurs fan – until it was pointed out that “no Spurs fan is clever enough to know Spanish and Portuguese”. Later the suggestion was that the transfers were part of some convoluted campaign to buy the club. Last year Media Sports International and its cryptic Iranian frontman Kia Joorabchian attempted to secure a controlling interest in West Ham but quibbled over figures, a bid of £ 90 million being deemed too small. The plot thickened yesterday when the West Ham board confirmed they had received a takeover bid. In a statement on the stock exchange, they added that the bid was unrelated to the player coup and at a very early stage of discussion. 

Thursday’s actions, however, looked temptingly like a global conglomerate shifting its most valuable assets from a failed plant in South America (Corinthians of Sao Paulo) to a more conducive site in London (where MSI is based, for what that’s worth), establishing goodwill and financial leverage for another takeover move, and offering West Ham players they could only afford to keep by accepting outside investment. The widely- accepted story that West Ham is being used as a shop window for a season, until MSI can obtain substantial transfer fees for the players, is slightly compromised by the figures being banded about. 

The sum at which a transfer would be triggered is suggested as being € 50 million £35 million pounds for each player. Even if Tevez (who cost Corinthians, or rather MSI, just under £12 million to prise from Boca Juniors two years ago) and Mascherano light up the Premiership with their brilliance, the list of clubs willing and able to splash out that kind of money is usually limited to one, and it is owned by Roman Abramovich.

Which brings us right back to another conspiracy theory, that West Ham are being used as an extended acclimatisation zone until the players progress to Stamford Bridge, rather in the way that Manchester United farm their players out to the Belgian League. Then the West Ham fans’ collective sighs, caveats and rumour- mongering popped somewhere over Ilford and they settled to enjoy the fact that they had two of the world’s best players. Before long came suggestions that both grew up as massive West Ham fans running around the barrio in “ Pop” Robson jerseys singing vile songs about Millwall. 

Tevez, at 22, is simply one of the world’s most exciting forwards, a powerhouse with precise ball- control and a barrelling body- swerve. Comparisons with Maradona are de rigueur for any Argentinian, but irresistible in the case of the stocky Tevez, who graduated from a poor barrio family to being the hero of La Bombonera in the Boca district of Buenos Aires. Mascherano might have the more immediate impact. West Ham fans were congratulating themselves on having one of the best midfields in the Premiership with Nigel Reo- Coker, Yossi Benayoun, Lee Bowyer, Matthew Etherington and Hayden Mullins. Now they add arguably the best ball-winner and one of the finest holding midfielders in the world. Plenty of questions remain, not all of them financial. 

Will Tevez and Mascherano regard West Ham as a mere junction en route to their real destination, or will their reported professionalism and sound attitude allow them to show their full capabilities? The English media are making comparisons with Spurs’ acquisition of Osvaldo Ardiles and Ricardo Villa a quarter of a century ago, but neither Ardiles nor Villa were real stars of the 1978 Argentinian side. If Spurs had signed Mario Kempes and Daniel Passarrella back then, it might merit the comparison. 

In the meantime, West Ham fans should spare a thought for Carlton Cole. Denied an opportunity at Chelsea because of the club’s predilection for expensive international superstars, he moved on to a smaller club where he wouldn’t be confronted by some illustrious foreign bed- blocker keeping him out of the first team. Until Thursday. You could forgive a scowl when he is introduced to Tevez at the training ground next week.
