THOSE who say that there isn't enough fun in modern football simply aren't looking hard enough. Comedy is everywhere (and you could do worse than start with a Gordon Strachan post-match interview).
Set to be the critical comedy smash of the new season is the Clive and 'Arry Show, currently wowing summer audiences on the south coast of England. Although you are advised to savour it while you can, as it seems destined for a very short run. 

One newspaper piece last week compared the scenario to a classic Carry On farce, but an equally seductive analogy is that of the current Edinburgh hot ticket The Odd Couple: easy-going, streetwise and loveable slob suddenly finds himself sharing an office with an uptight, patrician prig with a finely-developed sense of his own superiority. Episode One: the lads get gubbed 3-2 at Luton ... 

Like all stereotypes, the differences between Sir Clive Woodward and Harry Redknapp are not quite as extreme as they would seem, but in the close confines of an ailing football club, they cannot help but be amplified, provoking much hilarity for anybody without an emotional investment in Southampton Football Club. 

The problem is that, with a close and amused media scrutiny, every utterance or action by any of the three principal protagonists, Woodward, Redknapp or the roguishly posh chairman Rupert Lowe, is regarded immediately as part of an ongoing power struggle at St Mary's. 

So the inexplicable signing of Dennis Wise is temptingly interpreted as Redknapp recruiting an unsophisticated graduate from the university of hard tackles to shore up the club's working-class credentials. In short, he was trying to make the casting a little bit closer to Lock, Stock And Two Smoking Barrels than Lowe and Woodward's Four Weddings And A Funeral toffs. 

Conversely, Woodward's hiring of Simon Clifford, the innovative exponent of Brazilian futebol salao and pal of Socrates, Zico, Careca and the rest, could be seen as a less-than-veiled slur on Redknapp's methods. The implicit suggestion was that Redknapp's meat-and-potatoes complexion was matched by his footballing philosophy and a little Copacabana thinking outside the box could remedy the club's dire straits. 

If that's the way they are thinking (and each would deny it) then you can see why this Odd Couple are going to be uncoupled sooner rather than later. 

For a start, Woodward is unlikely to be upset by any of what we might call Wise's rough charm. There are far tougher thugs involved in rugby union than football (although they tend to restrict their outrageous assaults to the field of play), and Woodward would understandably regard most football "hard men" as relative pussycats. 

MEANWHILE, Redknapp is one of the more technically-astute coaches in Britain, and presided over the nurturing of half the present England side at West Ham's academy. He will also be aware that Brazilians are a nationality that fares unimpressively in English football. Barring the occasional Juninho cameo in his first spell at Middlesbrough, and one or two decent Gilberto Silva performances for Arsenal, the world's greatest footballing nation hasn't made much of an impact on the game's birthplace. As Alex Ferguson pursues the full-back Cicinho, someone should remind him that he spent most of the summer trying to leave Kleberson outside the Salford Barnardo's shop. 

Such lack of basic communication is only the start of the problem. Both Woodward and Redknapp could be characterised as poor collaborators. Their past has been punctuated by unwillingness to suffer fools (or sensible advice) gladly. Woodward's recent ignominious Lions tour of New Zealand was such a personal production that he even hired the world's most notorious spin- doctor Alastair Campbell to attempt to tell the press what Woodward wanted them to write (sports journalists being less malleable than political columnists, the ploy misfired spectacularly). When Redknapp was invited to be a little more collegiate in his transfer dealings at West Ham, his exit was swift and bitter. 

In some senses it is a shame that the experiment should be attempted with too such singularly unsuited subjects. Lowe, although he is one of those annoyingly smug executives who provoke every football fan to righteous irritation, is right in thinking that football could benefit from outside influences. 

What he fails to realise is that the vast amounts of money that have flowed into the game in the past decade have only served to strengthen the hidebound culture of the dressing-room. Previously, respect would be reserved for those who had achieved greatness as a player or as a manager, and even that was easily withheld (as Bryan Robson soon found out at Middlesbrough). 

Now it's a little more complicated, in that top managers have to make sure they can match their stars in terms of flash cars, race-horses or property portfolios. "Show us your medals" has been joined by "show us your wage-packet". The relative poverty of rugby union is never going to cut much designer ice. 

Until Woodward proves himself (perhaps at a lower division club, doing things his way, rather than leaning over the shoulder of a real football man), his ideas will be marginalised. Alarmingly for Southampton's immediate prospects (one point from a possible six so far), Lowe might be stubborn enough, and Redknapp touchy enough, to ensure that the manager is first to vacate that overcrowded office. That might be because, when Redknapp was a slow but crafty winger at West Ham, he played alongside a man who lifted a real World Cup. He isn't about to be impressed with a trophy won with a wrong-shaped ball.