WHEN it comes to vexed questions of racial identity, who better to lob them at than Luis Aragones? The Spanish national team coach, who in his dotage is beginning to resemble a particularly malevolent portrait of Dorian Gray’s grandad, found himself pursuing this line of questioning in the build- up to Spain’s less than scintillating encounter with Liechtensten on Wednesday.
With the match offering nothing of note, the Spanish press pursued a particularly juicy controversy that has been filling their columns for the last week. The media were concerned with medias, the Spanish word for football stockings. In Britain we would probably call it Sockgate. 

The dispute stems from the last international against Latvia where those proud Catalans Xavi Hernandez and Carles Puyol contrived to roll the tops of their socks in such a way that the Spanish national flag motif was concealed ( thus endearing themselves to the considerable Spain- loathing constituency in Barcelona). The ensuing furore suggested that this was the equivalent of urinating over Franco’s tomb. This childish gesture sparked a wave of debate and invective, and resulted in Aragones being quizzed on the concept of “ españolia”, and his players’ lack of it. 

The poor German translator trying to report the press conference for the benefit of the Liechtenstein Gazette was stumped by this peculiar abstract noun. “ Spanishness” doesn’t quite cover it either, the word needing to convey some sense of passion and pride in representing Spain. In truth it’s an ancient bone of contention. The Spanish national team has always been a loose- knit collection of regional identities who are loth to identify themselves as Spanish, much as a combined UK team would be a seething nest of ancient grudges, had we not managed to secure an eternal FIFA dispensation to field four teams just because we invented the game. 

Players have always indulged in spurious quasi- political gestures without ever having the full courage of their convictions and refusing to represent Spain. Instead, players try to cling to some vestige of independence while accepting the rewards and high profile of playing for Spain. Xavi offered a hilariously disingenuous explanation. He was fully committed to Spain, he insisted, it was just that, ever since he was a youngster, he had always preferred to play in socks that were just one colour. 

Xavi had deliberately got himself booked against the Latvians in order to miss Wednesday’s match. He insisted that this was done in the interests of the national team, and nothing at all to do with the fact that he wanted to have a nice rest in preparation for Barcelona’s crucial league game this weekend. Actually the media’s fake outrage at this lack of commitment to Spain was a tad hypocritical. All they are really concerned about at the moment is the tightest finish to a title race in years. The irritating international was scrutinised for evidence that Aragones was being fair to both Real Madrid and Barcelona. 

The coach was scrupulous. Puyol and Iker Casillas were both rested, Puyol presumably told to use the time constructively in figuring out how to wear his socks properly. The title probably won’t be decided by Spanish players in any case. More likely it will hinge on a moment of brilliance from a Brazilian, a Dutchman, an Argentinian, or ( on present form) a crop- haired Englishman. 

The followers of Real Madrid, a club that is never too far away from complacency, are suggesting that a win in Zaragoza today will seal the title for them, with just a comfortable home match against Mallorca to negotiate on the last day. The Madrid- supporting papers gleefully point out how impressive Real’s record has been in Zaragoza in recent seasons. 

That tends to gloss over the fact that Zaragoza are a far more useful side this season, and need a win themselves to secure a UEFA Cup place. Barcelona’s local derby at the Nou Camp against Espanyol looks less complicated. Their neighbours usually enjoy putting one over on the big club, but when that would entail sending the championship to Madrid, perhaps they may be a little more ambivalent. There is understandably a sizeable contingent in Spain who would prefer the title to go to Sevilla, flamboyant winners of a second UEFA Cup and mostly devoid of the arrogance of the big two. 

Their title hopes are a little forlorn, but not entirely hopeless, and they still have a Cup final ( against plucky little Getafe) to look forward to. They have their share of Brazilians, Russians and Frenchmen in their side as well, but perhaps Sevilla still have a little more of that old- fashioned españolia lingering around their stadium.
