JE JE je. That's how the Spanish render in print the sound of laughter, and the phrase was much in demand on Wednesday when the financial details of Michael Owen's transfer to Newcastle were made public. Real Madrid were cackling all the way to the banco, happily flabbergasted that the ailing Geordie club had stumped up a frankly otiose €25 million (variously rendered as £16 or £17 million in sterling, although if they used the airport exchanges I frequent it would be more like £20 million).
This time last year, Real paid Liverpool €12 million for the player, and although a year's wages are hardly a negligible sum, Owen did repay them with 16 goals in his one and only season in La Liga. 

Only an English club would consider paying suchADVERTISEMENTa sum, wrote the Marca columnist Jaime Vargas, commenting on the fiscal insanity of the English game. 

In fact, only Newcastle ever considered paying such a sum. 

At Liverpool, Rafa Benitez, ambivalent about whether Owen would fit into his plans, was prepared to give Real back what they had paid for him, and no more. Even then he preferred to take Owen on a season's approval before stumping up the cash. Benitez saw his priorities elsewhere, specifically Simao Sabrosa of Benfica. 

That deal foundered when the Portuguese raised the asking price, presumably believing every English club was as extravagant as Newcastle. Chelsea, Arsenal and Manchester United were uninterested in Owen, not because they don't rate the player, but because they were sensibly unwilling to add his salary to their budget when they had all the forwards they needed. 

Newcastle certainly need him, although the suspicion remains that this is a club more interested in gesture acquisitions than developing a coherent strategy. So a week after paying Deportivo La Coruna a sizeable fee for Albert Luque, they found themselves making a signing that should consign Luque to the bench. 

Partly this stems from the heady Kevin Keegan era, when the emotional manager, bankrolled by Sir John Hall, took Newcastle to within an "I would just love it" of winning the Premiership. 

The £15million they paid for Alan Shearer was the football equivalent of the working man made good flaunting his wealth in the face of the aristocrats of Manchester United. In one sense Shearer proved himself worth the money. In another, Newcastle have won nothing since he joined them. 

This week's expensive shopping spree has also seemed an overeager propping-up of flagging prestige. Owen's scoring record makes him a smart enough buy, but the inflated fee Newcastle offered Real for Owen persuaded the Spanish club to make dealing with Liverpool prohibitively difficult, even if it was plain that Owen would have preferred to return to Merseyside. 

The Newcastle fans, emotional gluttons still, long after Keegan's departure, welcomed Owen uproariously in huge numbers at St James's Park on Wednesday, but should he misfire for a few games, his Anfield loyalties will be held against him. 

The player is entitled to feel a little embarrassed that he attracted so few suitors, and that Liverpool's affections were so lukewarm. After all, he hardly disgraced himself in a year when a foundering Real Madrid came to rely on his goals. 

His former team-mate, Ivan Helguera, said that Owen had been decisive in the relatively few games he played. "He's been a great team-mate," Helguera said. "He was a very nice guy and a superb player. He made a real difference last season, and it's hard to lose him, because we valued him so highly. I can only wish him all the best." 

Helguera is a plain-speaking sort, and liable to be sympathetic to Owen's lack of political clout at the Bernabeu, as he knows himself what it is like to be without leverage. Previous galacticos Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo and David Beckham arrived at Real more as business partners rather than employees, international superstars uniting their personal brands with that of the club. Owen was less complex. 

It was touching, albeit bathetic, to hear Owen at St James's Park on Wednesday talking about his friendship with Shearer, based on a love of golf, football, horse-racing and family life. Owen is an earnest avoider of tabloid sensation, sarongs and provocative text-messages, and the impression he gave was of a man looking forward to lending his old mate Alan a hand creosoting his fence. Such lack of charisma and neglect of his own status was never going to carve him a niche at the Bernabeu. 

Owen arrived as an excellent footballer, nothing more, and could only expect to be treated with the cynicism that defines the relationship between major clubs and their expendable personnel. 

THE plaudits and best wishes expressed by Helguera were echoed, rather less convincingly, by Real officials, who, to their own considerable surprise, have now scraped up enough cash to buy the lank-haired Sevilla defender Sergio Ramos. Back in his Marca column, Vargas's piece on Real Madrid's adroit juggling of their finances was headlined "The miracle of the loaves and fishes", and certainly, after the lavish fee spent on Robinho, Newcastle's largesse has helped to balance books that were straying heavily towards the red. 

In fact Vargas was just beginning to crow about the trick the wily madrilenos had pulled on the credulous Geordies when he recalled that Newcastle was the self-same club who sniggered up their sleeves at the €20 million they received in 2004 from Real for Jonathan Woodgate, who hasn't played a competitive match since. 

What goes around comes around, and truly Freddy Shepherd and Florentino Perez were made for each other. 

Je je je.
