EIGHT months to go and the people of Kaiserslautern are already wondering what will become of their classy modernist stadium once it has hosted its two World Cup matches.
German economic blunders are never going to trouble the rest of Europe for more than ten seconds though, and the greatest anxiety afflicting Germany's larger neighbours is whether they will even have a team in the finals next summer. 

England's contemplation of that unthinkable scenario has occupied most of the English sports pages for the last month. If we are to believe yesterday's back pages, Sven-Goran Eriksson has been provoked into dropping the player he regards as England's most-gifted defender, Rio Ferdinand, in favour of the ring-rusty and sluggish Sol Campbell. 

Eriksson cannot win any battle fought in the tabloids and this move can only be interpreted as a nervy reaction to accusations that he is too reverent in his dealings with senior players. 

As surprising as England's struggles is the continued uncertainty about whether France, world champions only seven years ago, will make it through qualifying. Raymond Domenech's side has improved its position considerably since the ignominious request for Zinedine Zidane to come out of retirement and help the national cause. 

Thierry Henry's belated discovery of his goal touch against the Republic of Ireland pulled France into second place in Group 4. Tonight, though, they have a tricky visit to Berne where they'll face group leaders Switzerland. 

The Swiss are hardly one of the European superpowers, but they have been exceptionally competent in qualifying. In Alexander Frei they have a player who has shown he can trouble French defences. 

Worryingly for the French, ever since they nicked Euro 2000 from the Italians, they have choked as regularly as England's Tim Henman in tennis. 

On paper, France - like England - should be among the favourites for a World Cup played in the heart of Europe. As it is, it might be more advisable to place a few shrewd bets on Holland, a nation that, for once, seems to have come through qualifying without too many scares.The Dutch need either a draw away to the Czech Republic today or a win over Macedonia on Wednesday. Even if that isn't achieved, they are likely to qualify automatically as one of the best two runners-up. 

In the last finals in West Germany in 1974, the Dutch national team reached their apogee by taking an early lead against the hosts in the final. But they then neglected to underline their superiority in the rest of the match, eventually losing 2-1 to the determined but technically-inferior Germans. 

They partially redeemed themselves 14 years later by winning the European Championship in Germany. That side, which ruined its chances of World Cup success in Italy in 1990 by the usual bouts of internal wrangling, owed much to the classy finishing of Marco van Basten, now in charge of the national team. 

Van Basten's initial assets were his impeccable playing career, and his relative purity in the tainted world of Dutch football politics. Van Basten has proved surprisingly adept in appeasing the egos of his older players, while offering chances to younger talents. 

He has also been quick to recognise that the old triumvirate of Ajax, Feyenoord and PSV Eindhoven no longer exert such a firm grasp on Dutch domestic football, and has been far readier than his predecessors to recognise the progress of clubs like AZ Alkmaar and RKC Waalwiijk. 

Experienced Dutch international, Manchester United goalkeeper Edwin Van der Sar, has been impressed by Van Basten's astute start in management. "We had a stronger team in 1998 and 2000, but this crop of players is still young and we have never had such a good qualification as now. 

Van Basten can spot a player like Khalid Boulahrouz at RKC, quite a small team. He got selected for the national team, played well and, a week later, he went to Hamburg." 

Perhaps most significantly, Van Basten understands the singular mentality of the Dutch footballer, an attitude that can be summed up crudely as every player thinking he knows best. 

Says Van der Sar: "He gives the players a lot of responsibility so they know that, next time, they are not going to make the same mistakes again. 

"He's still young, of course, and still learning but he's got ideas on how to play and which exercises are needed on the training pitch." 

In the last World Cup, Rudi Voeller took a weak German side to the final by channelling player power and dampening expectations. Van Basten looks capable of doing the same, with a much better collection of players. 

Tonight's opponents, the Czechs, found their qualifying campaign bedeviled by a hangover from Euro 2004, where they knew they were much the best team in the competition but came away without the trophy. Assuming they fail to overhaul the Dutch or secure an automatic runners-up place, they will be the side everybody wants to avoid in the play-offs. 

In the convoluted politics of qualifying, even if Eriksson's team defeats Austria, he should be hoping for the Dutch to avoid defeat against the Czechs. 

That result would ensure Poland a place in the finals in Germany as one of the best runners-up, even if they lost to England on Wednesday. The final match would thus become meaningless for the Poles. 

Given England's 32-year-old nightmare from the last time they had to beat Poland to ensure participation in a Germany-hosted World Cup, every little bit helps.

