IT'S TOO late now, but you wish the people behind that masterly Zidane film had been focusing their cameras on the countenances of Sir Alex Ferguson and Jose Mourinho this season. Any half-decent edit would have captured arrogance, ire, petulance, malice, exultation, the whole broad sweep of the less edifying human emotions.
That delicious character Mourinho has become a little deranged of late, as he sees the chance of a third successive title eluding him. It's doubtful whether Mourinho has ever heard of Herbert Chapman, but he realises that winning three titles in a row is the definitive recognition of a great team. 

For now he must sulk and cast up scattergun accusations about various fantasy penalty appeals. 

Ferguson only really gets reasonable and approachable when things go his way. After recent results he has seemed positively avuncular. He remains the unrivalled master of glorious hypocrisy of course, questioning why Mourinho hasn't been sanctioned for making ludicrous accusations, when if he had been, Ferguson might have had to ask for a decade's worth of similar offences on his part to be taken into consideration. 

If league results have made the Premiership encounter between the sides unlikely to be the decisive showdown Mourinho would have liked, and the FA Cup Final remains an entertaining sideshow, this week could see the two teams confirm their collision course for Athens and the Champions League final. 

Both managers give the impression of being intensely dissatisfied with having won only one European Cup each, a distinction that, after all, merely puts them on a par with Tony Barton (who he? Exactly). 

There seems to be a certain inevitability about their meeting in Athens, although each takes a less-than-substantial lead into their away legs this week. 

Mourinho's Chelsea at least have the consolation of coming up against a small club with limited ambitions. Liverpool's fans will loudly declare a slightly different opinion of their team's status when the clubs meet at Anfield. The Liverpool manager Rafael Benitez responded to Mourinho's suggestion that the club was neglecting the league and concentrating entirely on the Champions League by saying "good idea" and resting his key players for Saturday's leisurely defeat down at Portsmouth. If the Spaniard was the type for acerbic jibes he might suggest that Chelsea have been neglecting the league lately as well, dropping four points in their last two games. 

Tiredness, a word unacknowledged at Stamford Bridge all year, crept in on Saturday, allowing Bolton to level a game Chelsea would normally have cruised through authoritatively. Almost as painful as the loss of two points was the injury to Ricardo Carvalho. The elegant defender has excelled this season, much of it in the absence of John Terry. When Liverpool defeated Chelsea 2-0 in the Premiership in January, Chelsea's uncertain defending was to blame. Without Carvalho, a similar scoreline is not beyond the realms of possibility on Tuesday. 

Milan, who trail United 3-2 after their first leg, secured a 1-0 away win against Torino on Saturday. There is little doubt that the same scoreline will be the extent of their ambition on Wednesday at the San Siro. 

While most observers understandably purr with appreciation at the scintillating attacking football that allowed United to retrieve deficits against Milan and Everton in their last two games, the Italians will prefer to concentrate on the deficiencies that resulted in their conceding two goals in each match. The Milan team have the luxury of a simple tactic. Gennaro Gattuso, if fit, will retrieve the ball and give it to Kaka, who will do exactly what he did at Old Trafford. 

United in turn will look to Wayne Rooney to continue the phenomenal form that restored United's prospects in Europe and the Premiership just at the point where they seemed about to be dashed. Rooney is not a player who knows the value of the middle ground; his is a personality that is attracted by extremes. In the San Siro he will either secure a place in the final for United, or be sent off for one of his untimely red-mist moments. 

Some abstract force though is pulling Chelsea and Manchester United towards Athens, for a personal showdown that would be compulsive viewing. After all, it's not as if you would get much of a final out of Milan and Liverpool.
