IT IS always a little disconcerting to witness a football manager trying to reinvent himself. Sir Alex Ferguson responding to a journalistic inquiry with a wry smile and a self-deprecating bon mot, Arsene Wenger shaking his fist in vexation at a fourth official, Alan Curbishley slapping his triumphant players on the back after a 4-0 cakewalk: none of these images spring readily to the imagination.
So it has been surprising and not a little dismaying to see the personality makeover presently afflicting the Liverpool manager Rafael Benitez. His first couple of seasons in English football have seen Benitez, below, take on the demeanour of a reticent and painstakingly polite manager, with the air of an exchange student keen to pick up lessons in English culture and to keep in the background when the vulgar squabbles break out between the Scotsman, the Frenchman and the Portuguese. Benitez's cautious and eminently reasonable pronouncements were fairly refreshing given the prevailing air of disingenuous cant and mind-games that has dominated the Premiership managerial tussles for the last decade. 

Ever since the American investors' cheque with all those fat zeroes cleared, though, it has been a case of no more Señor Tipo Simpatico. Instead, with several million bucks behind him, Benitez has affected a swagger and started shooting his mouth off with the arrogance of those managers who have actually won a Premiership title. After a career where he has been accustomed to point out the budget differences between his team and title rivals, he is obviously going to take a while before he is accustomed to the rules and etiquette of the rich boys' club. 

He started off by deliberately and ill-advisedly referring to Everton as a "little club". Exasperated by David Moyes's calculated defensive tactic of what is known graphically in Spain as parking the bus in the goalmouth, Benitez set out to wound. He lost a lot of his hard-won dignity in the process; the grapes seeming sourer than a premature harvest in La Rioja. Liverpool fans defended him, but half-heartedly; their local rivalry is fierce, but it is counter-productive to diminish their rival club's status. 

Benitez's cavalier dismissal of Everton was the polar opposite of Bill Shankly's throwaway gag that the city had two teams: Liverpool and Liverpool reserves. Shankly was steeped in Scouse football history and knew Everton's significance. It is pertinent that in his unhappy retirement he preferred to go and watch the Everton first-team training rather than Liverpool. 

Rather than being a wry tease, Benitez's petulant comments (somewhat ignoring the accepted Merseyside wisdom that a draw is hardly a disastrous result in a local derby) smacked of the vulgar upstart, patronising his neighbours with a smug "we are considerably richer than you" put-down. It will take as long to live down as his last major gaffe: refusing to take the FA Cup seriously. It will also have the damaging effect of turning every encounter with Everton for the next few seasons into even more of a grudge match, as the team in blue endeavour to throw that "little club" insult back in his face. 

This week's comments about Barcelona at least stem from an area where Benitez has considerably more expertise, trying to win a propaganda battle with one of Spain's aristocratic giants. 

At Valencia, Benitez proved he could humble the lordly big two. At Liverpool it's not quite so straightforward. Although Liverpool fans might concede that their club are the underdogs in next week's Champions League tie, they are hardly going to accept being cast as plucky minnows. This, after all, is a meeting of the trophy's last two winners. 

Benitez suggested that the likely return of Lionel Messi and Samuel Eto'o from lengthy injury absences smacked of desperation. A more reasonable interpretation might be that these are two of the world's most formidable forwards and if they are fit they might as well play. 

Attempting to undermine Barcelona's confidence looks like it could also be dangerously counter-productive. This is a side that has seemed listless for most of the season, even if they sit at the top of the Spanish league. There is a sense that as Spanish and European champions these are players who have lost their hunger and are already pondering their next big move. Eto'o's refusal to make a late appearance as a substitute in last week's league match was remarkable, as was his very public embrace with Ronaldinho for the benefit of the cameras this week; the players had been rumoured to be feuding for months. 

Benitez's comments, though, seem more likely to inspire a spirit of togetherness among the slighted Barcelona players, and to encourage Messi and Eto'o to prove that they are fit and in form. 

It hardly smacks of a tactical masterstroke, or the sort of mind-games the cannier Ferguson would employ. Benitez might also have to be a little more humble with his pronouncements if, as seems likely, his tactic in the Nou Camp amounts to parking a big Merseyside double-decker in front of Jose Reina.
