BRITISH tennis stands accused of parochialism with the weekend's tournament pitting England against Scotland (or rather pitting the ebullient prodigy Andrew Murray against the flag of convenience veteran Greg Rusedski).
Amidst the beginnings of Murraymania (Henmania painted in Braveheart woad) British tennis fans are likely to be happily oblivious to an event that merely decides the best tennis nation in the world, rather than the notional superior of two countries  who have been risibly inept at the game for the best part of seven decades. 

In the same way that British football languished in provincial mediocrity for half a century because of its unwillingness to learn lessons from overseas, British tennis's obsession with Wimbledon and inability to appreciate the international game has been an obstacle to producing players of any substance until Murray (who, significantly, spends more time in Spain and the US than the UK). It would be helpful if they could at least show a passing interest in events beyond these shores. 

The weekend's Davis Cup final admittedly suffers a little in its billing, in that it is contested by two nations who weren't even nations until relatively recently: Croatia and Slovakia. It's a final for aficionados perhaps, although victory will have immeasurable significance for the nations involved. 

The Davis Cup has always been something of an anomaly in the ruthlessly individualistic sport of tennis. Top players (especially top American players) have often viewed it with the same disdainful scepticism that Tiger Woods reserves for the Ryder Cup. An attitude that can be boiled down to "what's in it for me?", ie where are the ranking points and the prize-money? Conversely, when national pride manages to overcome cupidity it can be compelling, It is at its best when it has an element of rowdy jingoism attached, as it managed in recent triumphs by the Australian and Spanish teams. 

On paper this final looks like a dour kind of contest, between the sort of hard-hitting baseline players that make Rusedski seem like Boris Becker by comparison. The fact that the Croatian and Slovakian populations will be hanging on every power-serve though should add an edge of tension and vulnerability that could make for a memorable final. The Croatians have the advantage in terms of squad strength, with Ivan Ljubicic now well-established in the world top ten and backed up by the powerful duo of Mario Ancic, and Ivo Karlovic. The Slovaks rely on Dominik Hrbaty and Karol Beck, with the veteran Karol Kucera and Michal Mertinak in support. Their prodigious achievement in knocking out the champions Spain, and the fancied Argentines (with Guillermo Coria and David Nalbandian in the team) on their way to the final has given them a quiet confidence. Their captain Miloslav Mecir said: "Croatia's capacity and rankings are better than those of our players, but what's important is what happens on the court." 

The Croatians are not going to sit back and hope that their quality will be sufficient. Intriguingly their team captain Niki Pilic has also included one name that even the sort of tennis fan who believes the sport starts and finishes in Wimbledon fortnight will recognise. The former Wimbledon champion Goran Ivanisevic, below, is among the (exceedingly long) list of luminaries who have dashed Tim Henman's hopes at the All-England Club. He retired from professional tennis in 2004 but has been drafted into the Croatia squad as a wild-card, valuable reserve and inspirational cheerleader. The 35-year-old Ivanisevic deserves to have a share in possible national glory given that his example and success did much to put Croatian sport on the world map after independence. 

Ljubicic, whose individual performances this season have been impressive enough, has produced some of his best matches in the team competition, notably in the semi-final against Russia. He might be the new Croatian hero, but the old warhorse Ivanisevic will be a comforting presence courtside even if he isn't asked to dust off the headband to play. 

Andrew Murray's annus mirabilis hasn't quite made Scottish tennis a force to be reckoned with yet. If the Scots are serious about this tennis thing though, they might spare the Davis Cup final a passing look, if only so they know what the competition is about when the British tie comes to Glasgow in the spring.
