WILLIAM Wallace, Robert Louis Stevenson, Sawney Bean, Sydney Devine . . . your boys took a hell of a beating." Actually Saturday’s dismal game at Hampden would have been unlikely to have provoked much in the way of exultation in Oslo broadcasters, simply because anything less than three points in Scotland would have been the biggest Norwegian disappointment this side of a Eurovision Song Contest.
Saturday’s match offered only two areas of solace for Scottish fans. The first was the knowledge that James McFadden could be useful goalkeeping cover for those inexperienced teenagers. The second was that the manager’s days must be numbered. 

Berti Vogts might be the only man not to realise this. German pressmen, not having any of their own team’s qualifiers to cover (fortuitously, for there is little doubt that the current German team would have laboured to make it to their own World Cup finals) have taken to besieging him with impertinent questions. He told them about the "joy" he was feeling in the job. 

Maybe this is that carefree state of mind that occurs during the last hours on Death Row. Or maybe it’s just another example of Vogts’s detachment from reality. We amateur psychologists have a phrase for this and it’s "in denial". Actually we could come up with a whole conference worth of material from shirty Berti’s more eccentric utterances, a personal favourite being his indication that losing against Norway might just be the ideal preparation for giving those vulnerable Italians a doing. 

The thing is, Berti might never find out. His best hopes of a successful trip to Italy any time soon might involve making sure his towel is deployed on the sun-loungers around a Rimini swimming-pool. I’ll give you 9-2 against finding anyone who’ll call me a betting man, but all logic suggests that this week’s trip to Moldova will end up with Berti wishing us all a tight-lipped Auf Wiedersehn. 

Omens are never good for Scottish internationals but Wednesday’s match has enough dark portents hanging over it to make Macbeth seem like a slab of social realism. Injuries and suspensions have left Vogts scouring local parks to see if any lads fancy a match. Moldova are hardly a force in European football. Indeed, let’s face it, it was news to most of us that they were even part of Europe. Being unknown with a poor record in qualifiers and a collection of players we have never heard of are, of course, the ideal ingredients for another Scotland defeat. 

So let’s cut out the shilly- shallying and start casting around for Vogts’ successor. Everyone will be speculating come the Thursday morning hangover, so let’s jump the gun a little. Those who have suggested it’s a straight toss-up between Walter Smith and Gordon Strachan are overlooking a key fact. Both of those managers earned a reputation for being canny, astute and no fools (in Strachan’s case it was a reputation that served as a substitute for actually winning anything). In the current climate, when the announcement of every Scotland squad has the media scurrying to their Rothmans yearbooks to find out who these players are, any manager with a modicum of sense would think twice before accepting the job. 

No, what Scotland needs in the interim period before Tony Mowbray’s crop of urchins grow up into Scotland’s golden generation is a vainglorious fool, capable of seducing the nation with a collective dose of intoxicating mendacity. In short Scots need another Ally McLeod. 

As it happens the ideal candidate has suddenly become available. Paul Gascoigne has just hung up his boots at Boston and has announced he is ready to devote himself to coaching. He already has a deep insight into the cultural roots of Scottish football, what with his first-hand experience of provocative sectarian gestures and tormenting sluggish defenders before volleying past fat keepers. 

OK, he’s a foreigner, but not as much as Berti. Geordies are just Scots with their brains kicked out (although for some reason that adage is reversed on Tyneside). Apparently he is flirting with the notion of changing his first name, having tired of Paul. A simple slip of the deed - poll form and there we have it: Jocky Gascoigne, a nation’s new hope. 

Assuming Sheryl still has the keys to that lodge on Loch Lomond, the lad could be in residence again by next weekend, and looking forward to a triumphant return to Italy. You know it makes (no) sense (at all).
