FEW soap operas could have come up with a more complex love-hate triangle. Jose isn't speaking to Arsene but will deal with him "professionally". Arsene and Alex have loathed each other for years, but now occasionally have to offer a show of unity against the young upstart. Alex thinks Jose is too cocky by far, but can have an occasional post-match banter with him over a bottle of decent Portuguese red.
The whole compelling comedy kicks off again next weekend with Arsene Wenger and Sir Alex Ferguson having to attempt to regain some of the ground they lost so dramatically to Chelsea last season. 

If neutrals liked Chelsea as flawed also-rans, it's difficult to warm to them as plutocratic, arrogant champions. Peter Kenyon, one of football's least charming personalities, has already described the new season's title race being contested "among a group of one". 

They spent a ludicrous £21 million on Shaun Wright-Phillips (which works out at about £300,000 for every inch of the winger), as a back-up to Damien Duff and Arjen Robben. They are willing to spend substantially more than that on the unproven midfielder Michael Essien. Substantially cheaper was the returning Hernan Crespo, who cost just Mourinho's airfare when the manager flew to Italy to whisper sweet promises in the Argentinian striker's ear. 

Chelsea's assets will include a deeper squad than any of their rivals, although that might be neutralised by the rather more significant strength of a settled team with an impressive collective spirit. Mourinho moved on Scott Parker and Mateja Kezman over the summer, but still has the luxurious difficulty of allowing expensive stars a first-team opportunity without upsetting the carefully-built cohesion of his side. 

Modern football moves at such revolutionary pace these days that Manchester United now represents Chelsea's polar opposite. From being the richest club in the world, they now have a credit-burdened American owner with an eye on the bottom line, and a squad that looks shallower than a Salford canal. The gradual fragmentation of Ferguson's great 1990s squad continued with the sale of Phil Neville. The younger Neville may never have been a world-beater, but he was part of the furniture at Old Trafford. His fellow academy graduates David Beckham and Nicky Butt are long gone, and Ryan Giggs's days may be numbered. 

With Rio Ferdinand, Roy Keane and Ruud Van Nistelrooy variously discontented, morale at Old Trafford is hardly ideal. The only consolation is that Ferguson probably has the two most naturally-gifted forwards in the Premiership in Wayne Rooney and Cristiano Ronaldo. If Rooney maintains the form of last season, and the inspiration of last week's individual masterpiece of a goal, he could haul United into title contention. 

Arsenal's summer has been punctuated by the not-unexpected departure of Patrick Vieira. His loss is not insurmountable. For much of last season he was playing as if already on his way. If many were surprised to see Wenger give so many first-team starts to the Spanish teenager Cesc Fabregas, perhaps the manager was already auditioning Vieira's replacement. 

Wenger's attitude to the transfer market has been a kind of lofty disdain, which might be justified but has hardly strengthened his squad. The pursuit of Julio Baptista was always going to fail once Real Madrid had expressed an interest. The acquisition of the inventive and industrious Alexander Hleb was a more typical Wenger deal, although £10 million is more than he usually likes to pay. Hleb is a direct replacement for Dennis Bergkamp, although the Dutchman seems unwilling to make way immediately. Arsenal's Premiership challenge could quickly be derailed by injuries, or the loss of form of one of their key players. 

It's a backhanded compliment to the strength of the Premiership that few would rate the title chances of the champions of Europe. Liverpool could see off Juventus, Chelsea and Milan in the last three rounds of the Champions League, but struggled when it came to the more mundane stuff of Crystal Palace, Bolton and Manchester City. Rafael Benitez's spending has been lavish but unspectacular. Buying a reliable goalkeeper, Jose Reina, was long overdue, but the acquisition of Peter Crouch is hardly going to offer Liverpool an attacking option as potent as Rooney or Didier Drogba. 

Plus Benitez is really going to have to learn to stop being as reasonable and reticent if he wants more than a bit part in this bitchy soap.
