THE Damned United, David Peace entitled his recent novel about Brian Clough and Leeds United. Kevin Blackwell's expletive supply could presumably come up with something stronger than "damned" to describe the club that sacked him this week.
If the likeable fall guy who presided respectably and commendably enough through one of the bleakest periods in the club's history needs a little piquant consolation, he could do worse than reach for Peace's book. Admittedly calling it the greatest football novel ever written is akin to enthusing about Barry Ferguson's most eloquent witticism or Dianbobo Balde's deftest flick, but it's a masterpiece and Blackwell would probably recognise with a weary sigh Peace's description of Elland Road as an eternally rain-sodden purgatory of paranoia, plotting, ill-will and rancour. 

This is a club only its own supporters could love, and recent attendances suggest that their affection has its limits. Football moves so swiftly that its history rarely has much relevance to the present. In the case of Leeds though, it seems that the club carries an abiding negative image regardless of its owners, managers or players. 

Clough's reign as manager was about 28 months shorter than Blackwell's and, in terms of achievement, rather less impressive. Blackwell dragged his remaindered stock of a squad to the Championship play-off final last May. Clough took over Leeds at the start of the 1974-5 season with the team as League champions. He left them in October 1974 three places off the bottom of the old First Division. 

The novel neither embraces nor dismisses the romantic theory that Clough went to Leeds with the aim of destroying a side he despised, the team of Don Revie and Billy Bremner. In a TV interview Clough seems to imply the club needs a kind of moral laundering: "Leeds United have been champions, but they've not been good champions, in the sense of wearing the crown well. I think they could have been a little more loved, a little bit more liked, and I want to change that. I want to bring a little bit more warmth and a little bit more honesty, and a little bit more of me into the set-up". 

Of course Clough brought no such things, frozen out by the hostility of senior Leeds luminaries like Bremner, Johnny Giles and Norman Hunter, concerned (correctly) that Clough held them in contempt and wanted rid of them. 

They had overseen a decade of unprecedented success under Revie, an era in which they won titles, FA Cups, League Cups and Fairs Cups, and very few friends. They were the first English side to perfect a systematic gamesmanship - time-wasting, pressurising referees, an intimidatory physical approach. 

This was also an era when, as Peace's Clough points out, Leeds missed out on several trophies they had seemed destined to win. This brinkmanship was most conspicuous in 1970 when, chasing an unprecedented treble, they lost the league to Everton, the FA Cup in a replay to Chelsea, and a bruising "battle of Britain" European Cup semi-final to Celtic. 

In 1972 they lost the title to Clough's Derby by losing their final league game against Wolves. The next season they lost the FA Cup final to Second Division Sunderland. Clough's explanation was that Wolves and Sunderland were acting as football's avenging conscience, raising their game when it mattered against the despised Leeds. 

If Clough did set out to destroy Leeds, he didn't have time to complete the job. The club reached the European Cup final at the end of that season. Their later subsequent decline was broken by two brief revivals. It's not difficult to view Howard Wilkinson's 1992 title-winners as a 70s revival act, and Wilkinson as a Revie-lite, almost as methodical, albeit with a finer sense of personal probity, his teams as dull as the memory of Reaney, Madeley, Cherry and Hunter passing back to the keeper perpetually twenty years earlier. 

David O'Leary's Champions League semi-finalists were infinitely more entertaining, but still seemed to carry the poisoned traces that hang around the Leeds gene-pool. Lee Bowyer and Jonathan Woodgate's off-field antics were deplorable and despicable, while on the field, the approach of players like Alan Smith, Danny Mills and David Batty were as painfully reprehensible as the famous crimes of Bremner, Hunter and the slyly vindictive Giles. 

The reported shortlist for Blackwell's successor suggests Ken Bates wants to turn oh-so-Yorkshire Leeds into a London club, with Alan Curbishley, Dennis Wise and Glenn Hoddle all mentioned. 

Hoddle might be the ideal choice, capable surely of attributing the club's evil essence to Elland Road being built over an old pagan burial ground. In the meantime Bates may well be unimpressed by the way the club seems to be surfing the cultural zeitgeist; as well as Peace's brilliant book, the mordant songwriter Luke Haines has a ditty on his imminent album, entitled Leeds United. 

At an Edinburgh show last month Haines intimated with a broad grin that a Leeds fans' organisation had been in touch interested in hearing the song. He then played it: a vicious portrayal of a blighted 1970s Leeds of depression, domestic violence and the stalking Yorkshire Ripper. Come to think of it, this might just be the anthem Leeds United deserve. 
