IT's tricky business choosing the soundtrack for a World Cup exit montage.
For the viewer the end product is a little spoiled by the thought that the production team must have met up in May with a pile of CDs and said "right we're looking for something to convey the disappointment of a penalty shoot-out defeat in the quarter-final after a tournament in which the lads never played to their full capacity." 

The BBC went for a melancholy and elegiac anthem by the Pet Shop Boys, ITV for something gruffly masculine and wry from Johnny Cash. The BBC's coverage seemed to carry portents of doom from the outset. Gary Lineker, Alan Shearer and Ian Wright greeted us like three convicts on Death Row with Alan Hansen as the pastor there to console them but cheerfully knowing that he's off home for a nice supper after the grim business was over. Even the pre-match montage of England's World Cup highlights was cut to Joy Division's Atmosphere, as if they knew that England fans would be contemplating lobbing a noose over a sturdy beam by early evening. 

Hansen wanted to identify the scapegoat before the kick-off, although he strayed into the realms of unfairness when he suggested that Sven-Goran Eriksson's replacement of Wayne Rooney with Darius Vassell in the Euro 2004 quarter-final was "one of the worst substitutions of all time." Rooney had a broken foot at the time. The general mood seemed to be preparing the viewers for embittered disappointment. 

The theme continued at half-time, with the panel throwing around adjectives like "aimless, bitty and fragmented" to see what would stick. The increasingly less supportive Alan Shearer discovered an unwonted articulacy, to delineate the frustration of playing as a lone striker with no support. As the second-half attrition continued, the camera drifted over to Mick Jagger in the crowd, Mark Lawrenson lazily quipped that "he won't be getting a lot of satisfaction from this" neglecting to add that England fans were approaching their nineteenth nervous breakdown. The TV pictures didn't clarify why Wayne Rooney was dismissed. His boot descending excruciatingly on Portuguese scrotum didn't seem premeditated, while his push on Cristiano Ronaldo was playful rather than menacing. Afterwards we saw pictures of Ronaldo winking knowingly. 

That calculated adoption of the role of agent provocateur might mean Ronaldo receives a less-than-warm reception at Premiership grounds next season (unless he can swing his move to Real Madrid before August). After the game Shearer summed up the likely English response with the dark comment that "Wayne Rooney can go back to the Manchester United training ground and stick one on Ronaldo" 

Before the penalty shoot-out John Motson ran through all the previous English players who had missed in a shoot-out. That's the last time that will happen as the list is now too long to remember. 

The final lingering image of England's World Cup was of Rio Ferdinand on his knees weeping bitter tears. It was a contrasting bookend to a World Cup that had begun with Rio's cackling and puerile grin after catching his gullible team-mates with his pranks. It would be easy to stereotype Ferdinand as another dumb, shallow playboy footballer, but he barely put a foot wrong in five World Cup matches, and the cameras intruded on an excellent player's heartfelt pain at English failure. 

Hansen waited a respectful two minutes for the English to stifle their sobs before putting a languid boot into Eriksson. No doubt he was the first of many critics queuing to lay all the blame at the door of the terminally polite manager, attacks which would have more force if they weren't so vituperative and inconsistent. 

There was no time of course for the pundits who had hurled vicious derision at Owen Hargreaves, and at Eriksson for including him in the squad, to acknowledge that he had been the best player on the park. And the only player in the England team who could take a penalty kick.
