ON A flight last week I found myself sitting opposite the theatrical knight, legendary trouser-dropper and chariddy hero Sir Brian Rix. It being a dull flight I briefly toyed with the notion of yelling across the aisle "shame about your lad Graham eh?" Just to mess with his head.
I didn't of course, mainly because it would have entailed explaining a feeble gag to an elderly gent coming back from a relaxing holiday in the Azores. Recalling the fate of Graham Rix did make me realise that, for once, the managers of the SPL's top clubs have behaved with a grace, dignity and astuteness way above what their clubs have deserved. In a season with very few outstanding players, the bosses have come to the fore, and deserve most of the plaudits for a season that was, at least up to February, thoroughly intriguing. 

Not being a member of the Glaswegian cabal that forms the Scottish Football Writers, I didn't get to vote for their choice as manager of the year Gordon Strachan. They will of course be hugely relieved and grateful that I approve their final selection. 

It seems a perverse thing to say about a manager who won the league before Easter with a 20-point comfort zone, but what impressed about Strachan was his demeanour in defeat. Humiliations against Artmedia Bratislava and Clyde were there to test his mettle, and Strachan didn't hide behind excuses or run for cover. He came to face the media with honesty and his customary wit. 

You suspect he won over the players in adversity, and shamed them into recovering their pride for the league campaign. Although of course they may merely have been trying to arouse interest from English clubs who might offer them more lucrative contracts in the summer. 

Strachan's success also demonstrates the importance of media relations in the modern manager's job. You don't have to go back too far to encounter another Celtic manager in his first year who tried to build a team of attacking verve and invention but who suffered disappointing results in Europe and a humiliating Scottish Cup defeat. In this case the manager was pilloried out of Scotland by the hostility of fans egged on by a dismissive Scottish media. John Barnes' main problem was treating the press with prickly disdain. 

Perhaps that was understandable from a man who had scored a fabulous goal in the Maracana, but Barnes' lofty condescension led to his departure as effectively as his bad results. 

Strachan, like his predecessor Martin O'Neill, was adept at flattering the media pack and giving them stories, and the fact is the man has considerable charm. Something must explain the regularity of job offers despite having to wait until 2006 to win his first trophies as a manager. He is smart enough to know that the honeymoon is now over, and he will have to build a new team in the summer when much of his squad shuffles off down south or onto their Saga coach holidays. 

Probably joining them in England will be the martyred figure of Alex McLeish. At times this season McLeish has seemed like the faithful Smithers to David Murray's Montgomery Burns, suffering whatever humiliations were thrown his way. To most of us it was baffling that McLeish didn't seize any job offer in January rather than keep the seat warm for Paul Le Guen. 

It's an alarming characteristic at Ibrox that the club treats any foreigner who joins them with fawning gratitude, while Scots are received with casual disdain. Up to now it has been an attitude that has mostly been reserved for players, but with McLeish it was extended to the manager. You can only wonder at the saintly reticence of McLeish at restraining himself from even the most veiled criticism of his overpaid, under-achieving players, and the chairman who assumed he would stay on as caretaker until they found someone better. 

McLeish was the only dignified presence at Ibrox in a season when the team performed miserably at home, and the fans performed even more miserably abroad. 

In Edinburgh, Hibs fans' may have to start preparing themselves for the inevitable: that Tony Mowbray's excellence is noticed by a club with more resources and ambition than the Easter Road outfit. Mowbray's finest attribute is his boldness, tactical acumen combining with an irreverence about the Old Firm that allowed his team to humble Rangers in the Scottish Cup at Ibrox in one of the season's highlights. 

Across town, Rix's farcical sojourn at Tynecastle can have left the neutral with no option but to feel sympathy for the hapless coach. It would be facile to blame him for Hearts' slump in form after the prodigious start under George Burley. The obvious culprit is the SPL's other Monty Burns, Vladimir Romanov, who tacitly encouraged the players to question the coach's authority. Come the cup final you wonder whether Hampden will be big enough to contain the morality chasm between Gretna's saintly chairman and his opposite number.
