EXCESSIVE sporting ambition is not a common British trait. With a few exceptions, most British sports exponents are content to put a reasonable limit on their achievements, to settle for respectability rather than hurl themselves at immortality.
So when an exception looms over the horizon, the British reaction can be sceptical, even hostile. Paula Radcliffe was the nation's darling in the two years leading up to Sydney. Since that disappointing double failure, admiration for her comeback has been tempered with a degree of suspicion, that her athletic monomania wasn't quite seemly, or disdain at her single-minded obsession with proving herself. 

She was at it again this week. Undeterred by the experience of Athens, she had set her sights on double gold in the marathon and 10,000 metres at the World Championships in Helsinki. The collective athletics pundits' reaction last Saturday night when she plodded in a dismal, outpaced ninth on the track, was a barely-concealed satisfaction at seeing hubris punished. 

As it turned out, Radcliffe's experience in that final heralded a particularly disappointing week for the British team, with only Tim Benjamin in the 400m managing to make a final. It is left to Radcliffe tomorrow to attempt to elicit a few drops of consolation from a near-disastrous World Championships. The suspicion is that there are plenty who hope that she fails again, to compound national failure with a very personal disappointment. 

Those who had suggested that Radcliffe was pushing too hard to find redemption for Olympic failure, that she needed to exorcise the demons that plagued her on the hot, dusty road out of Marathon, seemed to have been vindicated by the 10,000m performance even if, by concentrating on an also-ran, they had failed to offer sufficient credit to a remarkable run by the teenage Ethiopian gold medallist Tirunesh Dibaba, a brilliant and exuberantly stress-free athlete. 

To dwell on Radcliffe's supposed psychological flaws, though, is being over-complex. Radcliffe is a typical athlete, she's just not typically British. The best sportsmen and women tend to be steely-minded pragmatists. 

Radcliffe has known she is the world's best distance runner for the last four years or so, and wants empirical proof in the record books. Astonishing world records have gone part of the way to proving that, but she realises she still needs to underline her superiority running against opponents rather than against the clock. The real sporting greats also thrive on constantly raising the bar, on forcing themselves to take on daunting challenges rather than ticking off realistic goals. 

What is remarkable is that Radcliffe still appears to have the very un-British ability to draw strength and commitment from disappointment. You can see her experience at the Sydney Olympics in 2000 as a turning point. Her steady plod at the head of the 10,000m field only to be overtaken by the three graceful Africans in the final stages seemed to have established her limitations. The typical British response would have been a gracious acceptance of her proper place a little short of greatness, like Tim Henman acknowledging the superiority of Roger Federer, or Ashley Giles admitting he will never be in Shane Warne's league. Radcliffe could have done that, and been loved as a plucky British tryer. 

Not her style. She refocused, changed her training regime, worked with what seemed like self-destructive rigour, and eclipsed every runner in the world over a series of searing performances on track, road, and, just for the hell of it, cross-country. I remember seeing her at the Holyrood cross-country event a couple of years ago, grimacing as she kicked up the Salisbury Crags incline, my friend's Labrador pup barking at her in mingled admiration and fear. She was like nothing he, or any of us, had seen before. 

Radcliffe knows that her career is finite. She just seems to have that vaulting confidence that it doesn't have to be finite just yet. She already rages at the prospect of the light dimming, to the extent that last week she mentioned that she quite fancies being around in 2012, plodding a last great marathon at the age of 38 through Docklands (she has already won over course and distance after all), winning what, in an ideal world, would be a second gold medal in her fourth Olympiad. 

THAT might be a pipedream, but rescuing a prize from Helsinki is well within the realms of possibility. Optimistic hindsight could suggest that the 10,000m run was a mere livener for the marathon. It is significant that she ran without spikes as an insurance against an injury that would put her out of the longer race. She has enough time to recover in any case, and we have the memory of her battling win over the New York marathon course as an example of her ability to make an impressive and swift comeback from disappointment. 

The Jonahs will point out the unbearable pressure she is under to win, and the fact that she has yet to win a major championship title. Radcliffe won't listen to that kind of negativity, and might prefer to take comfort in the words of the local hero in Helsinki, Lasse Viren, who won both the long-distance track events at the 1976 Olympics but could only manage fifth in the marathon. He knows better than most about the dangers and rewards of pushing yourself to the limit. "As a country we understand it and know what it takes to be successful," he said. "That is why Paula is so popular, because she puts everything into it."
