THAT loveable old ligger Pele has a habit of saying what he thinks the audience want to hear. Should he address the Coatbridge Women's Institute you suspect he would convince them that with a little application they could make it into the Champions League within a decade.
When he suggested some years ago that an African nation would win the World Cup though, his ingratiating diplomacy had more credibility than usual, simply because the continent is increasingly producing some of the world's finest football talent. 

If the World Cup is still tantalisingly out of reach, it may be because colonial attitudes are still strong in football. In a grotesque mirroring of 18th and 19th century exploitation of Africa, now the best footballing resources are shipped off to those old colonial powers Portugal, France and Belgium. 

The example of the stars who have earned fortunes (and fame) in Europe though is having a trickle-down effect in Africa, where clubs and players are becoming aware of the rewards for greater professionalism, and a little European conscience-money is finding its way to schools and clubs. 

This month's African Nations Cup will be the most intriguing yet, because the supposed superpowers of African football are at their weakest, and smaller nations have proved their potential in spectacularly successful World Cup qualifying matches. 

Whenever we Europeans try to understand Africa we have to beware of our inclination to patronise. That is the way this tournament has been treated in the past, as a festival of flamboyant but ill-disciplined football, involving hexes and witch-doctors, fabulous fouls and ludicrous defensive errors. 

In Europe club managers are moaning about giving up their African players, but in the broader interests of the world game, we need another strong continent to challenge the smug hegemony of Europe and South America. We also need the brilliance of African footballers to confound the sick racism that used to plague the English game and is now infecting the Spain, Italy and Eastern Europe. 

This year's tournament shared its qualifying sessions with the World Cup, so it's a fair guarantee that the 16 strongest sides will be present in Egypt. It offers a chance of substantial consolation to Nigeria and Cameroon, historically the strongest teams on the continent, but both surprise absentees from the World Cup in Germany. 

The Nigerians are experiencing their usual squabbles and recriminations, although their squad looks impressive, if a little elderly. Premiership veterans Nwankwo Kanu, Jay-Jay Okocha and Joseph Yobo are there, along with three younger and exciting talents from Serie A in Stephen Makinwa (Palermo), Obafemi Martins (Inter) and Christian Obodo (Udinese). In terms of talent, the Nigerians excel. Organisation is their weakness. Their FA couldn't even manage to scrape together the cash for the hotel bill for the side's Portuguese training camp. 

Depression still grips Cameroon after failure in the World Cup qualifiers. If they can cheer up quickly, they can benefit from having the best striker in the tournament in Samuel Eto'o. The sole reason that the bookies make Cameroon tournament favourites, Eto'o was devastated to miss the World Cup, and the danger is that this competition will seem an anti-climax compared to his exploits with Barcelona. 

Barring injuries, the rampant Ghanaians would have been an attractive proposition. Losing Michael Essien though has had an impact on Chelsea so you can appreciate what a hole it has blown in Ghana's midfield. 

The 2004 final was an all North African affair with Tunisia defeating Morocco. The defending champions, coached by Roger Lemerre are solid but unexciting, the attack led by a naturalised Brazilian Francileudo Dos Santos. Rangers' Hamed Namouchi and Ajax's Hatem Trabelsi offer application and experience and young forward Chaouki Ben Saada from French side Bastia will be attracting interest. 

The hosts Egypt might be the shrewdest bet. They are a cohesive unit with Tottenham's Mido finding form and consistency at last. They are stronger in attack than at the back, and face a tough opening group. 

If you are looking for an emotional interest though, could I make a brief case for Zambia? One of the poorest countries in the world, lacking any stars, they play with spirit and adventure, and also have one of the best nicknames. The Chipolopolo Boys have reached the final twice but have yet to win the trophy. It's unlikely they will achieve it in the alien conditions in Egypt, but they'll offer limitless entertainment trying. Zambia still embodies the spirit of African football, the element that makes this a competition to savour.
