FOR all its faults, you can’t deny that UEFA has a pleasing awareness of the polarities of its home continent.
Glasgow and Donetsk slug it out for the dubious status of least grubby also-ran on Wednesday, which will be about as pleasant as Ukraine gets in October, ie not very. At stake, most likely, is a chance to scrape a place in the UEFA Cup, tatty realm of third-tier oiks like Rangers and Hearts. Across Europe though most eyes will be on the Champions League tie of the week in the San Siro, where AC Milan take on Barcelona. 

After a few disappointments in recent years, both clubs are approaching the bombastic confidence of yore. Barcelona perhaps have better cause for celebration. Seven games into the Spanish season they have won six times, drawn once, established clear daylight at the top of La Liga, and, more importantly, opened up a nine-point lead on the floundering Real Madrid. 

On Saturday Frank Rijkaard’s team edged a 1-0 away victory in what could have been a tricky encounter in the local derby with Espanyol. Meanwhile Real Madrid were somewhat fortunate to come back from Seville with a point after Ronaldo grabbed an equaliser against a superior Real Betis. Never mind that Valencia remain Barcelona’s most credible title-challengers, the Nou Camp fans are delighting in Real Madrid’s inept start to the season. 

The difference at Barcelona is all in attitude this year. The more insouciant Dutch under-achievers have been moved on (Patrick Kluivert being the worst offender) and the new acquisitions have shown an appetite for the competition that seems to have shamed the longer-serving players into redoubled efforts. Deco scored the winning goal on Saturday, while Samuel Eto’o has been fuelled by the pique he felt at Real Madrid’s ostentatious desire to rid themselves of his registration. Every chance he gets, Eto’o casts aspersions on the Bernabeu regime, which of course only serves to endear him to the Catalan fans. 

It will be intriguing to see if Rijkaard unleashes the full force of his attacking possibilities in the San Siro on Wednesday, and just as interesting to see whether Carlo Ancelotti will fall back on his counter-attacking ploys in a home tie. 

In a squad which includes defenders of the capabilities of Paolo Maldini, Alessandro Nesta, Fabricio Coloccini and Jaap Stam, it’s hardly surprising that Ancelotti should occasionally accentuate the cautious approach. We witnessed it in the San Siro tie against Celtic, where Milan’s condescending disdain once they had taken the lead almost backfired when Celtic seized the initiative. 

At least Ancelotti has the personnel to alter strategies. The side is blessed with the unpredictable streak provided by the Brazilian Kaka, and by Andriy Shevchenko’s continued ability to score from the slightest of opportunities. Filippo Inzaghi, one of the most irritating strikers in European football because of his persistent habit of straying offside, his penchant for grabbing ugly tap-ins and the way he greets his clumsy goals with a look of religious awe, is coming back to form, and is ahead of the pitiable Hernan Crespo in the pecking order. The game will be either a cagey stand-off, or a swaggering series of counter-thrusts. Either way it’s not inconceivable that it will be a dress rehearsal for the final. 

With the possible exception of Jose Mourinho’s Chelsea (far better in Europe than against Manchester City), it’s difficult to see any club in Europe as capable as these two. Arsenal might be flamboyant and irresistible in domestic competition but their Champions League displays are erratic. After the giant trophy was carried off to that rather shabby port on the Atlantic last May, it would hardly be a surprise should it return to one of these patrician pseudo-capitals. In the meantime, take any odds about the draw on Wednesday.
