YOU don't need the imminent Brian Clough film to remind you that genuine charisma has been a dwindling resource in football for decades. When Sam Allardyce is regarded as a "personality", you know we are living through not so much a charisma crunch as a full-blown Great Depression of football characters.
Tuesday night offers a brief flash of brilliant white light in the grey fog though, when the two most interesting managers of the 21st century scowl at each other from adjoining technical areas in the San Siro. 

Even in a game that will feature thADVERTISEMENTe not-so-bland likes of Adriano, Ronaldo, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Dimitar Berbatov, the real stars will be Jose Mourinho and Sir Alex Ferguson.

Mourinho, inspiration for a myriad psychology conference papers on the "Napoleon complex", left a gaping chasm in English football when Roman Abramovich sacked him for being too professional. 

Like Ferguson's, his ego is monstrous. The Little Emperor wanted to conquer all of Europe. Ferguson is driven on by the goal of crushing Liverpool's seemingly indomitable records.

Former Stamford Bridge manager Mourinho wants edifices to his own genius. At Porto and Chelsea, he could take the credit almost entirely. Indeed, his determination to play down the significance of Abramovich's investment for Chelsea's two titles might have ultimately exhausted the Russian's patience.

After Chelsea, Mourinho waited around for the right offer, and when it didn't come, he accepted the Internazionale job. It was a tricky fit for his self-esteem, because Roberto Mancini had already accomplished the not-insignificant job of making Internazionale repeat Serie A champions. Emulating another's success is not Mourinho's style.

Mancini was replaced because his Inter side failed to make a credible stab at the Champions League, and dissenting voices attributed his Serie A success to the temporary consignment of Juventus to a Serie B penitentiary. Mourinho's task was daunting though. He had to maintain Inter's dominance of Serie A, and reinvent the team to make them competitive in Europe.

Saturday's fortuitous 2-1 win over Bologna gave Inter a nine-point cushion at the top. It was apparent to anyone who saw the efficient win by the same scoreline in the Milan derby the previous weekend that this is already a Mourinho team. 

Effective, energetic, disciplined and resilient, it can accommodate a maverick like Ibrahimovic without ever allowing any indulgence. The Swede's flicked back-heels are now precision passes into space. He is the best player in the world now, according to his manager.

That Milan derby was an instructive reminder of Mourinho's skills. 

The superstars, such as Andrea Pirlo, Pato, David Beckham, were on Milan's side. The dominant players, Sulley Muntari, Esteban Cambiasso, Adriano, were all Inter's.

It recalled the way that Mourinho managed to make decent but unexceptional players like John Terry and Frank Lampard believe they were world beaters and play like them (Terry has made the return journey since Mourinho's departure, and looks ordinary again). 

Mourinho needs grandiose ambitions to sustain his interest. 

Given that Mancini restored the club's domestic fortunes, Europe has become the priority. To attain legendary status at the club, he needs to win the Champions League. Remarkably for a club of their status, they have only won it twice, in 1964 and 1965. 

Under the aegis of the tactical visionary and terminal cynic Helenio Herrera, Inter might have made the late Sixties their era. Instead, their ruthless pragmatism was countered, with some success, by three brilliant Scottish managers, Jock Stein, Bill Shankly, and Matt Busby.

Stein, of course, masterminded the 1967 European Cup triumph over Herrera's Inter, the Scots coming back from a goal down to win 2-1. 

Mourinho's ambitions clash headlong with those of another Scot on Tuesday. 

This season has seen United's traditional strengths shift backwards, away from the exhilarating but erratic forwards, to an impeccable defence. 

Linking the two, after seizing the opportunity presented by Owen Hargreaves' injury problems, Michael Carrick has made a case for being recognised as United's most influential player. Ferguson must take plenty of credit for that, and for trusting in the excellent Nemanja Vidic, whose suspension on Tuesday is Mourinho's best, perhaps only, advantage. 

It will be rare to see two teams so moulded by their managers' personalities. Perhaps that is why Mourinho and Ferguson always strike sparks off each other. Beneath the very different sartorial exteriors, they are extremely alike.
