IF YOU were asked to name the most impressive winners of a football tournament in 2004 you might be tempted to go for the obvious candidates. Greece perhaps, for having the resilience to hold off all the favourites in Portugal in the summer. Or Porto for answering Jose Mourinho’s unswervable self-belief by winning Europe’s most prestigious club competition.
In terms of ruthless and effective attacking football, though, there is only one candidate: the Argentina side that won the Olympic tournament in Athens without conceding a goal. In Britain there is a tendency to devalue the Olympic football competition. It’s an entirely parochial one, based on the fact that none of the home nations can enter lest FIFA suggest that if a united British side can compete in the Olympics, why not in all other international competitions. In Asia, Africa and South America, though, it is regarded as second only to the World Cup in terms of importance, fittingly so perhaps because it was Uruguay’s mastery of Olympic football back in the 1920s that first inspired that ruminative Frenchman Jules Rimet to wonder about the potential of a World Cup. 

Argentina took it seriously enough to send a squad that was a blend of established internationals and promising prodigies (Sir Alex Ferguson still gets a little puce at the memory of Gabriel Heinze’s participation). Their domination of the competition was assured, and if it had been anything other than the Olympics, everyone in Britain at present would be raving about the displays of the latest Argentinian to be saddled with the epithet "the new Maradona", Carlos Alberto Tevez. 

Argentina is a nation where players have no worth until they are given a nickname. At 20 the tough, rangy and visionary Tevez is already "Apache", and there is an expectation about him that hasn’t been experienced in Argentina since Maradona emerged in the mid-1970s. For once the comparisons might not be too embarrassing. Tevez is at Maradona’s old club Boca Juniors, although not for much longer. Arsene Wenger is among the legion of European managers coveting his signature. 

Part of his allure is the great player’s unwillingness to be saddled with the stereotype of a position. As a teenager he was a midfielder, at the Olympics he scored eight times in six games (a tally not achieved since Bebeto managed it in 1988). Tevez is just part of a new generation of Argentinian starlets who look capable of emulating the world champions of 1986. The only other nation producing young talent of international class with such fecundity at the moment is England. As in England, the national team may find its biggest obstacle to success is the fractious relationship between the team and the national football association. 

Argentina is one of those fanatical football nations where every fan thinks they are perfectly qualified to select the national team, and every decision by the national coach is scrutinised forensically. 

The man in charge at the Olympics was Marcelo Bielsa, the coach who had been expected to lose his job after Argentina’s debacle at the 2002 World Cup. He stayed around long enough to oversee the triumph in the only competition Argentina hadn’t won, before mysteriously resigning in September. Politics and personal vendettas were involved, as always in Argentinian football, although perhaps Bielsa just got out on a high. 

He bequeathed his successor, Jose Pekerman, the makings of a squad founded on a pure passing game with little of the old Argentinian cynicism in evidence. It might have raised a few eyebrows when Bielsa’s side were the joint winners (with Iraq) of the Olympic Fair Play title. That is impressive when put alongside the side’s refusal to concede a solitary goal, a defensive resilience that can only be improved with the return to the team of the masterful Walter Samuel. 

The Olympic team showcased the wealth of young talent Pekerman has to play with. Apart from Tevez, 20-year-old Javier Mascherano and 21-year-old Andres D’Alessandro are about to consolidate regular positions in the Argentina starting eleven. Juan-Roman Riquelme, at 26, is something of an elder statesman, and along with Tevez he may be the foundation of Pekerman’s team for the World Cup in 2006. 

Despite Argentina’s position just behind Brazil in the South American qualifying group, the nation is still distinctly sceptical about Pekerman. He started perfectly with a swaggering 4-2 win over Uruguay, then, sticking with the same team, Argentina had a disappointing 0-0 draw in midweek with Chile. 

Pekerman, recipient of adulation on Saturday, was blamed for the poor showing on Wednesday. It’s good to know that the impossibility of pleasing everybody in Argentina football remains a constant.
