ROMA might have their troubles, what with some fairly hefty punishment from UEFA this week. Next week in the Champions League, though, they will come up against a club even more riven with recriminations and traumas.
Real Madrid’s start to this season hasn’t been quite as nightmarish as their end to the last. One league defeat and a 3-0 loss in the Champions League to Bayer Leverkusen, though, are enough to get the presses rolling with the "crisis" headlines, not least because the manager has resigned after only four games in charge. 

Jose-Antonio Camacho was supposed to be the man who could restore some discipline and pragmatism to Real’s disparate collection of superstars. Instead he has found what he might have suspected all along: that the politics of the club wouldn’t allow him to take the measures necessary to restore some sense of reality to the Bernabeu. 

The difficulties at Real Madrid are compounded by the fact every nuance, every hint, every gesture that emerges from the club is immediately analysed in the sports dailies. Two of them, the best-selling Marca and AS, are so fixated by Real that they have staff at every training session trying to read stories into every altercation. 

For years now, the smouldering story brought to the forefront with every setback is the notion that the home-grown stars resent the foreign galacticos. Fernando Morientes left for France apparently because he was angry at the acquisition of Ronaldo, Guti sulked at the arrival of David Beckham. All of them were baffled by the purchase of Michael Owen. 

This was an area where two of the president Florentino Perez’s avowed aims came into conflict. He wanted to make Real a world force in football again, and he wanted the club to be an embodiment of Castilian pride. While the Spanish players apparently welcomed the foreign stars, they made sure their own interests weren’t threatened, usually by recourse directly to the president rather than to the coach. 

At the heart of all this is Raul, on the face of it a model professional, a Spanish Gary Lineker. Below the surface he is a shrewd operator who exploits the adoration of the fans who have followed his progress all the way from the cantera, or youth academy. Even the president has to be wary of Raul’s leverage. 

The catalyst for the removal of Camacho, it seems, was the coach’s decision to drop Raul for the game against Espanyol. For months the papers had been speculating over whether any coach would ever have the cojones to leave out the out-of-sorts golden boy. If anyone did it would be Camacho, and it is not inconceivable that the coach used this occasion as a test to see if he had the backing of the president and the respect of the players. From the fallout, it was all too apparent that he didn’t. 

Camacho walked out with his dignity and reputation intact, despite some ludicrous stories in the papers which pay slavish obeisance to Florentino Perez, that Camacho had only left out Raul merely in response to media pressure (the mercurial shifting of postures in the Spanish papers occasionally make our own tabloids seem like models of consistency). 

The immediate rumour linking Sven Goran Eriksson with the Bernabeu vacancy seemed spurious not for anything as simple as Eriksson already having a contract with England and his denial of any interest, but rather because the Swede does not fit the profile of the sort of coach they recruit at Real Madrid. 

For a job caught between the three power-bases of the president, Raul’s Spanish axis, and the looser-knit alliance of foreign galacticos, there simply isn’t a coach available who would be able to placate all these forces. Real did best under a facilitator like Vicente Del Bosque, who was more diplomat and front man than a coaching mastermind. It seems unlikely that the reticent junior coach Mariano García Remón, who has been put in temporary charge, will emerge as another Del Bosque, but it seems equally unlikely that Eriksson would have anything to do with the present Real set-up. 

The conspiracy theorists will mutter about Real’s sudden predilection for English players, and suggest it might be bait to lure the Swede. Nothing so devious. The acquisition of Owen only baffled those who weren’t able to drag their thoughts off the field of play and into the Real treasury. The merchandising success of Beckham surprised even the most optimistic of Real’s accountants. 

Perez, a businessman not afraid to think of Real as a global brand, saw the opportunity to make another commercial killing, while laying out a transfer fee in the risible region of £7.5million. Owen is second only in popularity to Beckham in Asia (the recent Thai hesitation over investing in Liverpool was attributed in some quarters to their dismay at the news of Owen’s exit) and was bought, it seems, to sell white shirts rather than wear them. 

Owen might be gradually realising that. He admits he was shocked by Camacho’s resignation. If he has picked up enough Spanish to read the sports papers he will know that his start in place of Raul was a political rather than tactical ploy, that he was used as a pawn in Camacho’s struggle for some authority. After that battle was lost Owen will find himself behind Raul, Ronaldo and Morientes in the fight for two places. As Morientes last season, Samuel Eto’o before that, and countless others have discovered, trying to break into the Real clique can be soul-destroying. Don’t be surprised if Owen is back in England on loan come January.
