IT IS so unusual for Arsene Wenger to admit the Premier League is beyond his team by mid-February, that you almost suspect a trick. Then you remember that Wenger tired of the Machiavellian mind-games when Jose Mourinho arrived in English football, leaving the Special One to joust with Alex Ferguson, while he worked on polishing his own air of Olympian disdain. Maybe when he says it's over, he just means that it is over.

In effect though, by discarding the usual managerial fictions and writing off the league, Wenger could be giving his players permission to go through the motions in dreary matches while saving their energies for the Champions League. After all it'ADVERTISEMENTs what most of them have been doing for the past three seasons anyway. 

Even a manager as adept at manipulating reality to reflect well on Arsenal, couldn't do much about the cruel statistics of the table. At present Arsenal are closer to Wigan Athletic, a mere ten points behind, than they are to Manchester United, 15 points over the horizon. 

Wenger, below, described United as "untouchable" in the league. Like a wily general counting his casualties though, he is looking at other fronts where he might have more joy against the United juggernaut. Europe is the obvious priority. Arsenal have what looks like a more amenable draw than United in the knockout stages of the Champions League. Arsenal face the inconsistent Roma, United have to deal with the persistent thorn in Sir Alex Ferguson's flesh, Mourinho and his Internazionale side.

Wenger has always treated Mourinho like an amusingly cocky adolescent, but would enjoy seeing him pull off another coup against Ferguson.

Wenger will also be inclined to treat the FA Cup very seriously this season. Arsenal had a facile fourth round replay win over Cardiff on Monday in a match that witnessed the return of Eduardo Da Silva just in time for the serious part of the season. Eduardo, not the luckiest player in the world, contrived to tweak his hamstring in that game, but he will be back in serious contention by March. 

Wenger's plan will be to hoard his relatively meagre resources for the games that matter, while trusting that his side remains focused enough to pick up three points in matches like today's routine encounter with Sunderland at the Emirates. Given the wavering concentration of some of his players though, securing fourth place and Champions League qualification looks the toughest element of Arsenal's season now, especially when they come up against opponents like today's, desperate for survival points. Too much depends on whether Aston Villa begin to crumble and whether Guus Hiddink has an immediately revitalising effect on Chelsea. When Arsenal play at their best, it is difficult to level any serious accusations about the way the team has been constructed.

Their best though has become an increasingly rare treat. 

While most managers are concentrating on the next result, Wenger could be accused of spending too much time thinking about the future rather than concentrating on more immediately pressing goals. His comments earlier this season about how Arsenal's fiscal prudence and foresight with regard to squad development would eventually be recognised as the smart way to run a football club, didn't encounter any coherent opposition at the time. On the other hand, you don't get too many crowds composing chants along the lines of "We're going to win the league in three years time." Some of the Arsenal faithful may be concerned that they are being run by an economics professor rather than a football coach.

Wenger's patience may mean that Andriy Arshavin won't be pressurised to make a quick adjustment to the harsher realities of English football. Instead he is relying on a supply line of world-class players on their way back to the first team from the sick bay. 

Eduardo, Emmanuel Adebayor, Tomas Rosicky, Theo Walcott and Cesc Fabregas should all be ready to return in the next few weeks. 

If Wenger has already spun this season as another transitional phase en route to honing a phenomenal side of youthful brilliance, the suspicion is that the manager should also be willing to accept it as a lesson in the practicalities of competing in Europe's most arduous league. Arsenal are a defensive midfielder and a couple of competent and decisive central defenders away from a place in the top four at present, and that is a situation the manager will have to address in the summer.

For now, it's a test of Wenger's selection and man-management skills. If he gets it right, Wenger can have grounds for optimism that, come May, his team has a chance in at least one of the cups. The fixture list also, intriguingly sends Arsenal to Old Trafford for the penultimate league match of the season. 

It would appeal to Wenger's mordant sense of humour if Arsenal end up having a say in the Premier League title race after all.
