LEAVE them, they'll get tired soon enough. That might summarise the rather complacent attitude of England's big four to Aston Villa. Martin O'Neill's team might have scampered into the top three of the Premier League like hyperactive toddlers, but the assumption lingers that their thin squad will eventually succumb to attrition and slump to fifth or sixth.
Yesterday's fifth-round FA Cup defeat at Goodison began seven days that will ask Villa all the stern questions. Wednesday brings the first leg of a daunting Uefa Cup tie with CSKA Moscow, while Saturday lunchtime sees Chelsea visit Villa Park for a ADVERTISEMENTvital league match. If Villa win that one, it would leave Chelsea trailing in their dust, and firmly establish Villa's right to be taken seriously.

If they haven't attained such respect already, part of the blame could be attributed to the reticence of O'Neill. His demeanour has been that of a manager happily surprised, occasionally even flabbergasted, by the achievements of his young players. It's understandable that he wants to avoid any pressure of expectation, but occasionally he gives the impression of being not so much the mastermind of Villa's success, but merely a happy onlooker. 

After beating Blackburn, O'Neill identified the top clubs as those that can put together streaks of seven or eight wins: "Amazingly that's what the lads have done here." He might also reflect that the truly top clubs don't find it amazing.

The suspicion is that some of Villa's pleasingly fluent counter-attacking football emerged through expedience rather than design. If there is such a thing as a happy accident, then the injury to John Carew last autumn might be thus identified.

Without the bustling Norwegian as an outlet, Villa tended to retain the ball, or play more thoughtful passes. With the speed of Ashley Young and Gabriel Agbonlahor as weapons, allied to the poise and intelligence of James Milner, some of Villa's football might even make Arsène Wenger purr. 

O'Neill has enjoyed discreet but significant support from Randy Lerner, football's Good American. It's not just that Lerner has been willing to finance deals for the likes of Young, Carew and, in January, Emile Heskey, but that he was willing to fend off tempting offers for Gareth Barry last summer. If Barry had left it would have identified Villa's ambition as secondary to financial considerations. That he stayed was surprising, and, it turned out, invigorating.

It's intriguing to speculate what a significant impact the Barry summer transfer saga might have on this season's Premier League. Regardless of whether he would have strengthened Liverpool's side, the club's failure to secure his signature left Rafael Benitez fuming, broadening an internal rift at Anfield that could eventually cost them the title. Remaining at Villa, he has given the team a calm and authoritative fulcrum, a steady focal point for all the energetic scurrying of the younger players. 

O'Neill's league position now allows him to indulge the serious manager's attitude of being airily dismissive of cup ties and stressing the importance of the league. The Uefa Cup has a vestigial glamour about it though, if only as a distant echo of Villa's finest hour, the European Cup triumph in 1982. O'Neill, who played in the Nottingham Forest team that won the European Cup two years previously, might also have a quiet yearning for European success. His recent memories of this competition involve a piquant and bittersweet memory of a night in Seville. 

Success against CSKA and Chelsea would help those theorists wanting to interpret Villa's progress this season as a timely morality tale, demonstrating the possibility of challenging the super-rich with a club that is developed more sensitively. 

Even if they win both games though, expect O'Neill, canny deployer of the bucket of cold water, to express surprise and another smattering of cautionary clauses.
