FRIENDSHIP is a flexible word, but you'd hesitate to use it about a relationship which involves one of the parties paying the other several million pounds. Guus Hiddink's decision to take over the world's highest-paid caretaking position was apparently motivated by his friendship with the club's owner Roman Abramovich. The Russian is though, you would infer, a friend whose offers are rarely refused.

Abramovich was a friend in need, having found himself suddenly bereft of a manager at a crucial point in the Premier League season (let's gloss over the fact this was because Abramovich had sacked the incumbent). Hiddink wouldn't have conADVERTISEMENTsidered interrupting his job as Russia boss for any other billionaire. 

OK, enough with the disingenuous, Guus. Abramovich already indirectly supplies the hundreds of millions of roubles that flow his way in his first job. He was hardly in a position to say "nyet" to a spot of tempting at Stamford Bridge. 

Those expecting Hiddink to be the instant saviour for Chelsea may be a little premature. His achievements at club level are concentrated on PSV Eindhoven where he won the European Cup in 1988, and secured six Dutch titles in two spells. Arguably his most impressive achievement with PSV was reaching the Champions League semi-finals in 2005. PSV are a wealthy club by Dutch standards, but hardly in a position to compete financially with the European elite. Instead their successes underlined Hiddink's capabilities at helping decent but unexceptional players over-achieve, and instilling a formidable team-spirit. 

In Spain, spells with Valencia, Real Madrid and Real Betis won more friends than trophies. Hiddink's teams played in an attractive style, but the politics of Spanish club football, where player power and interfering presidents undermine the coach's authority, could be perceived as an ominous omen for his prospects at Chelsea. 

His achievements with South Korea were impressive, mostly in regard to the cohesion and athleticism he brought to the team, rather than the actual results. Their run to the semi-finals of the 2002 World Cup looks good in the record books, but was propelled by some of the most risible refereeing decisions in football history. 

His work with Australia may prove more relevant to the task at Stamford Bridge. Australia's players were a talented but disparate bunch scattered over the major leagues of Europe. Hiddink, despite having a day job with PSV , moulded them into a disciplined, organised and effective team, playing to their strengths, which were defensive for the most part. Having qualified at long last, they did themselves justice at the 2006 World Cup finals. The most pertinent experience he brings to the Chelsea job though concerns his work with the Dutch national team at the 1996 European Championship and 1998 World Cup. In 1996 the Dutch team was so rife with cliques that they suffered one of their most embarrassing defeats, the 4-1 humiliation by England. 

Hiddink's uncompromising approach eventually got through to some of the world's most recalcitrant professionals, and the Dutch were unlucky not to make the World Cup Final in France two years later, where they would have provided stiffer opposition to the French than Brazil. In the troubled history of Holland coaches, Hiddink's achievements deserve considerable respect.

That Dutch experience will mean there is a certain déjà vu about the situation Hiddink encounters at Chelsea when he takes full charge from Monday (Ray Wilkins will oversee todays FA Cup tie at Watford). Chelsea's problem involves cliques, players unwilling to give their best to the club, and a general lack of fitness.

The internal politics are less straightforward. Hiddink will get a briefing from Luiz Felipe Scolari on the problems, but his best asset is the understanding that he is only there on a temporary basis, so doesn't have to make everyone his friend. He merely has to communicate the mutual advantage of rescuing Chelsea's season, and trying to emerge with a trophy. If that is achieved of course, as John Terry has intimated, a longer-term appointment may transpire. The Russian FA may have to do what Abramovich tells them. Again.

The sense of deadlines, and focused goals, served Hiddink well in international management. He is used to having limited time at his disposal (although the South Koreans enjoyed lengthy training camps and squad get-togethers before the 2002 World Cup), and in this instance has the advantage that none of the Chelsea squad will be unfamiliar to him. 

One intriguing scenario will concern Hiddink's attitude to Michael Ballack, one of the clique who essentially made Scolari's job untenable. 

It will be interesting though to see if Hiddink's Russian responsibilities creep into his Chelsea job. Russia's main rivals in their World Cup qualifying group are the Germans. With crucial qualifiers coming up at the end of March, a manager with a mischievous sense of humour might be inclined to tell Ballack to spend an hour or so running up and down sand-dunes, or instructing Terry to launch a few testing knee-high tackles in training. We'd all understand. 
