THE history of popular music has always featured a chasm between critical opinion and populist adulation. The cynical elitists with their two-star reviews never got what the little girls understood, the sheer potency of personal charisma.

David Beckham still encapsulates that gulf between what the pundits are saying, and what the public wants. If there was one place immune to his considerable charms, you would have thought it would be Glasgow, but not so. His fleeting appearance with ADVERTISEMENTMilan for a money-spinning friendly on Wednesday prompted embarrassingly exuberant scenes of Beckham mania. 

Perhaps it is about time the pundits stilled their dissenting voices, too. A mixture of incredulity and cynicism greeted his arrival at Milan. He was expected to have dulled his edge in Hollywood, be in Milan for a few friendlies and photo-shoots as an asterisked footnote to his career. Instead the Italians are taking Beckham as seriously as he is taking his football.

The motivation for the Italian move was Beckham's determination not to let his England career fade away. Perhaps he is chasing appearance records, but his comments after the game in Glasgow made it clear that he believes the 2010 World Cup is not beyond him, a fourth World Cup to make amends for the disappointments of the last three.

Inclusion in the England team to play Spain in Seville late on Wednesday night seems difficult to resist, and Fabio Capello would be selecting on form rather than sentiment. If Beckham plays, he will equal the 108 caps of another blond Essex boy Bobby Moore, although Moore has a unique distinction as England captain that Beckham could never repeat. 

It might be difficult to come to terms with, considering Beckham's image, but his importance to Capello's plans might be as the voice of wisdom and experience, a cool head in a side of occasionally unfocused energy and enthusiasm. 

The squad Capello takes to Andalucia is missing three key players in Joe Cole, Steven Gerrard and Wayne Rooney. The senior striker is Emile Heskey, one of six Aston Villa players in the squad. Expectation rests on James Milner, Ashley Young and Gabriel Agbonlahor to prove they are capable of fitting in to an England XI. It's indicative of the polarised nature of the two clubs challenging Manchester United for the Premier League that, while Capello's England squad features six Villa players, Vicente Del Bosque's Spanish squad has five Liverpool names. 

Given the absentees and the calibre of the opposition, it is a game that England could be forgiven for losing, even if Capello wants to maintain his streak of impressive results. Capello was characteristically bullish about England's chances against a Spanish team that has risen to the top of the Fifa rankings and is youthful enough to be capable of making a repeated impact in major tournaments. Del Bosque's only significant absentee (if we no longer regard the omission of Raul as surprising) is Cesc Fabregas. 

The locals might be aggrieved that the Sevilla wingers Jesus Navas and Diego Capel have been left out, but that underlines the wealth of talent presently available to Del Bosque. Gerard Pique and Sergi Busquets of Barcelona are the latest youngsters to make the full squad.

Spain's decades of under-achievement were finally ended by Luis Aragones' team last summer. Capello's task is to achieve the same for an England side that has also achieved nothing in four decades. Aragones' triumph came partly through placing trust in youth, in discarding the established names and committing to the likes of Andres Iniesta, David Villa and Fernando Torres. 

Capello would kill for a couple of strikers as talented as that last pairing. He has achieved some success by working with Heskey and Rooney, but England's attacking options remain heavily reliant on the contributions of Cole, Gerrard and Frank Lampard. 

With 16 months before the World Cup finals, Capello, like Aragones a year ago, faces some tough decisions. Will he overhaul his side completely and allow players like Agbonlahor and Young to stake their claim, or will South Africa be the last charge of the old guard?

Either policy could still accommodate David Beckham. Certainly, if he contrives to escape from LA, and settles in Milan, Wednesday's 108th cap is unlikely to be his last.

