Here’s a sobering fact: Most American workers spend more time working than they do with their families. Additionally, a high majority of workers take their work home with them. The time we do spend with our families tends not to be leisurely. Taking kids to soccer practice, making sure food is on the table, running errands, and running a household all take time. If we’re lucky, we may be able to grab an hour or two of quality time. More often than not, this is an unrealistic, idyllic setting. Real life has additional stresses±financial issues, teenage rebellion, aging parents, etc. How can we manage this stress? It’s long been known that being physically fit helps to alleviate stress. Sometimes, however, stress can get the best of us, running us down and making us more susceptible to illnesses, which further contributes to our stress levels.

Fortunately, insurance companies are finally realizing what regular readers of healthnews.com have known for years—a healthy lifestyle is one of the most important tools in preventing disease later on. Indeed, the nation as a whole is starting to embrace this concept; this is the first election in recent memory where both candidates are advocating increasing wellness programs as a way to manage the nation’s healthcare costs.

Last week we spoke about wellness programs and how they can help employees and employers better manage health care costs by focusing on keeping employees healthy. Programs supporting healthy weight-loss, quitting smoking and other healthy lifestyle choices are making their way into the workplace. This week, we’re going to take employee fitness a step further by exploring Employee Assistance Programs or EAPs for short. EAPs have a physical fitness component, but they are primarily interested in mental fitness—through stress-management. An EAP is kind of like having a best friend as a sounding board for life’s woes. Someone you can complain to when things aren’t going well, someone who will listen non-judgmentally, who will talk you through things, offering support and resources where appropriate along the way. EAP’s originally started off to address alcoholism in the workplace for large employers. It then expanded into behavioral and mental health issues caused by workplace stress. An employee who is stressed-out is not as productive and tends to be more at risk for illnesses and injuries. Employers recognized this so when EAPs started offering counseling for stressed-out employees, employers breathed a collective sigh of relief. After that, EAPs expanded to offer counseling and support in areas such as employees going through divorce or employees experiencing the loss of a loved one. In addition to grief counseling, EAPs in recent years have tackled everything from financial and legal issues facing an employee to issues of taking care of elderly parents or living with an unruly teenager. In addition to other services, the best EAPs out there provide adoption assistance and even grief counseling for the loss of pets. It’s important to realize that EAPs are not insurance programs, but are designed to work with your insurance program’s mental health benefits. They typically will serve as a gateway for larger issues that will then be referred to the appropriate mental health specialist as needed. As such, much of the EAP programs are accessed via telephone counseling and resources.

Not that EAPs are strictly offered through large employers. Because of the impact EAPs have on a person’s stress level (and subsequent health and productivity issues), EAPs are increasingly showing up on medium and smaller employer plans. There are even a small number of individual health insurance providers exploring using EAPs on their individual plans. Still in it’s infancy, these programs are typically not as comprehensive as employer-based plans and oftentimes rely heavily on discounts from approved vendors.

In this busy, oftentimes stressful world we live in, it’s encouraging to know that we’re not alone and having someone to call who will listen and help us focus on solutions can help us work through life’s difficulties. 

Until next time stay healthy!
