Consumer confidence in our major financial institutions are at an all-time low. With so many insurance companies on shaky ground, now is a good time to take a look at ways to assess your insurance company’s overall strength. There are various companies to help us with just that. These companies rate how strong an insurance company is. However, while one insurance company may have an A- rating with A.M. Best, another may have a BBB with Standard and Poor’s and still be considered favorable. HMOs generally don’t have ratings at all. What does it all mean? In this week’s column we try to help you make sense of the ratings systems that grade insurance companies so that you can make intelligent decisions in your health insurance purchasing decisions.

A division of the federal government, the Securities and Exchange Commission (or SEC) has the power to designate a ratings company a Nationally Recognized Statistical Ratings Organization (or NRSRO). So the first step in looking at an insurance companies ratings is to make sure they use one (or more) of the SEC’s NRSRO-designated ratings organizations. By far the most common insurance company ratings we see are from A.M. Best, which has traditionally specialized in rating insurance companies.  A.M. Best has been around since 1899 and rates an insurance companies’ financial strength in terms of claims-paying ability. They have six "secure" ratings for insurance companies:

A++, A+ (Superior)
A, A- (Excellent)
B++, B+ (Very Good)

Anything falling below a B+ is deemed "vulnerable" and the purchase of insurance products from these companies should be avoided. Of course, the higher the rating, the (hypothetically) stronger an insurance company should be. However, financial strength is but one item that should be considered. Other ratings companies such as Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s and Fitch give insurance companies various rankings based upon certain criteria.

Standard and Poor’s originated in 1860 and can be thought of as a credit rating for insurance companies. Just as you and I have a credit score assessing how well we can pay our debts, so too do insurance companies. Insurance companies borrow money by issuing bonds for the public to purchase. People may be familiar with the U.S. Savings bond program. Basically, you buy the bond for half the face amount on the bond, and then after so many years you get to cash it in for the full face amount. What that really amounts to is a loan to the bond company (in this case the Federal government), which is then promised to be paid back with interest (the face amount of the bond) at a time in the future. Insurance companies use the same thing to raise money. The ratings assess how well an insurance company can pay back the money that people used to buy their bonds (with interest). “Good” credit scores are called “Investment Grade” ratings by Standard and Poor’s and are designated AAA, AA, A, or BBB by the company. Anything less is deemed "junk bond" status and should be avoided.

Companies like Moody’s (started 1909) and Fitch (started 1913) do the same thing and have similar rankings.

The ratings business is quite lucrative with insurance companies regularly paying hundreds of thousands of dollars annually to be rated. As such, there is the possibility that a rating may not be totally unbiased. Some have been accused of unfairly "throwing their weight around” to get companies to pay for a rating. In at least one case, a large insurance company lost $175 billion in a matter of hours after a ratings company lowered their ratings to ‘junk-bond’ status after they refused to pay the agency to rate them. Also, companies have failed even when a ratings organization has given them high marks.

On the other hand, Weiss Ratings, Inc., which was bought by TheStreet.com in 2006, relies on consumers purchasing their reports for revenue. Weiss rates the "safety" of various organizations such as insurance companies and HMOs. While they charge a fee for their reports, they publish the "best and worst" rated companies on their website for free. They also are one of the only companies to rate HMOs which tend not to get ratings. (HMO’s can be researched to see if they meet the National Committee on Quality Assurance or NCQA accreditation). However, Weiss does not have an NRSRO designation.

The lesson to be learned here is that using ratings organizations’ report cards on insurance companies is not a guarantee that your company is bullet-proof, but that it is another tool to help you make a wiser decision.

Until next time, stay healthy!
