The past few weeks have really strained the insurance and financial markets to their (and our) limits. I thought this week we’d take a break from all that’s going on in the current market and take a look at where it all began.
 

The beginnings of insurance actually are much older than what most people think. The ancient Jewish holy book, the Talmud, was written in 500 BC and deals with several aspects of insuring goods. Many of our current Western culture’s institutions were borrowed from the ancient Greek and Roman societies. The kernels of what was later to be health and life insurance originated with the Greeks and Romans around 600 AD when they organized guilds called "benevolent societies" which cared for the families and paid funeral expenses of members upon death. Guilds in the Middle Ages served a similar purpose. Before insurance was actually established in the late 17th century, "friendly societies" existed in England, in which people donated amounts of money to a general sum that could be used for emergencies.
 

The concept of medical insurance originated with Hugh the Elder Chamberlen in 1694. Medical insurance actually consists of two types of coverage: 1) coverage for accidental injuries and 2) coverage for sickness. As the Industrial Revolution moved people from the farms to the cities, an injury could easily prevent someone from working which could really impact whether they could provide for their family. The very first "accident" insurance was provided by The Railway Passengers' Assurance Company of London as part of a train ticket in 1848. In 1852, the company expanded its coverage to include any accident, not just injuries incurred as a passenger on their train. Like many good ideas, an entrepreneur then brought the concept over to the United States. That entrepreneur happened to be a passenger who had purchased a ticket on the train in Europe. He went on to found the Travelers Insurance Company in 1863. Travelers offered coverage for accidents that occurred during travel. It wasn’t until almost the turn of the century that sickness coverage found it’s way into American life. In 1890, the St. Lawrence Life Association issued the first policy that combined sickness with accidental injury coverage. However, it didn't cover medical expenses per se; rather it covered the loss of income incurred by the claimant who was unable to work because of illness. Additionally, there were only a few diseases that qualified.

The concept of "health insurance" took a huge leap, when in 1929 a group of teachers contracted with Baylor University Hospital in Dallas, Texas to receive room and board, and medical services for a fee. This arrangement would serve as the prototype for Blue Cross/Blue Shield’s future medical insurance plan instituted in 1932. Also in 1932, The National Labor Relations Act, which required management to bargain with labor over "wages and conditions” was enacted and became a catalyst for employer-based health benefits across the nation. From 1932 to 1942, membership in the Blue Cross plan went from 1,300 insured to over 3 million. On December 27, 1933, America's first "Blue Cross Baby" was born in Durham, North Carolina. The entire cost of her delivery and her mother's 10-day hospital stay totaled $60. 

From there, the combination of unions wanting better benefits from employers and a WWII wartime wage freeze (resulting in employers offering more benefits, including medical insurance to entice workers from rival employers) combined to accelerate the medical insurance industry. Today, millions of people are able to have access to medical care that they may otherwise not be able to afford.

As we can see, the insurance industry has a long and storied history. It has taken a long time to go from “benevolent societies” to comprehensive coverage as provided by today’s plans. There have been times when they had to take a step back to move forward, but they have always moved forward and they will again.

Until next week, stay healthy. 

