I like old TV programs. One of my favorites was the Six Million Dollar Man. He was kind of a realistic “superman” who put things right. You may remember the “We can rebuild him. We have the technology,” phrase at the beginning of the episodes. With the current state of affairs in our country we sure could use a “superman” to clean things up. With the election around the corner, I attempt to make sense of the one area in this election I feel I’m qualified to comment about—Health Insurance Reform. Due to space restrictions, it certainly isn’t a comprehensive dissertation, but more of an overview.

While Americans arguably have the best healthcare available in the world, its access and affordability are definitely unequal across economic lines. The extremely wealthy have no problem paying for care, but for the rest of us, health insurance plays a major role in deciding what care we receive. Many people agree that the health insurance industry we have today is “broken” and needs to be “rebuilt.” As such, health care reform has risen to the top of Americans’ concerns and is a major part of each party’s platform.

While each candidate’s proposed plans have differences, they are remarkably similar. They both attempt to address three important areas: 1) Affordability, 2) Access to care, and 3) Better Quality Care.

While everyone agrees that premium costs have risen dramatically and need to be addressed, the two candidates approach the solution differently. Senator Obama puts the responsibility on employers and the insurance companies. Employers will be required to provide health insurance for their employees. Those costs will be partially offset by reimbursing employers for employee catastrophic illnesses as long as the employer “gives it back” to the employees by passing the savings to them in the form of reduced premiums. Typically, employers receive a huge increase in their premiums on the anniversary of when their health plan started if there are large, catastrophic claims. Because most insurance companies only require the employer to pay 50% of the employees’ premiums, when the whole company’s premiums go up it translates into higher premiums for the employee as well. Senator Obama’s plan also calls for small businesses to get a tax credit of up to 50% on the premiums they pay on behalf of employees. Lastly, it requires insurance companies to limit their profits and their administrative costs by requiring a certain percent of the premiums they charge to go directly into patient care.

Senator McCain on the other hand, would give a tax credit of $2,500 for an individual and $5,000 for a family in which to pay for health insurance. People that are employed and are receiving health insurance benefits would be subject to federal income tax on the value of those benefits. The thinking is one of “leveling the playing field.” Senator McCain’s position is that employees aren’t taxed on their health insurance benefits (unlike vacation time, sick days, benefits outside of actual time spent working, etc.), and as such have an unfair tax advantage over individuals who purchase their insurance privately. By giving everybody a tax credit to purchase health insurance (either privately or through an employer) it keeps employer plans in place at no extra cost to the employee by virtue of the tax credit while encouraging private insurance for those that don’t have it. Having the credit go directly to the insurance company ensures that the credit is doing its job by having people purchase insurance.

How to increase access to care is different for both candidates. In addition to requiring all employers to provide health insurance to their employees, Senator Obama mandates that the federal government implement a guaranteed-issue national plan in addition to private market plans. Senator McCain has similar propositions but leaves it up to the individual states to come up with what he calls “Guaranteed Access Plans.” Other areas where the candidates have similar ideas is to allow Americans to purchase foreign, cheaper prescriptions providing they are safe, have better chronic disease management, focusing on quality of care versus quantity of care and promotion of preventive health and wellness programs, all of which will serve (theoretically) to drive down costs and improve quality of care.

One area that seems to cause a lot of confusion is in the “medical transparency” issue. Simply put, all this means is bringing medical information into the 21st century. Currently, privacy laws and limited or outdated methods of accessing medical care information creates duplication. If you see Dr. Smith and have a battery of tests run, and then go to Dr. Jones in another state, you probably would have similar tests done. Dr. Jones basically relies on what you tell him and then runs tests accordingly. If there were some sort of database with all your medical information, doctors would be able to access health histories and streamline tests and care accordingly. So, we may “have the technology.” Whether we have the funding is another matter entirely.

Until next time, stay healthy!
