With healthcare access and affordability on the top of everyone’s agenda, we’re heading for a crisis that hasn’t been touched upon in either the presidential campaigns or legislatively. It’s something I have told my clients for years: The best health plan in the world is useless if you aren’t able to see a physician when you need one. With payments to primary doctors being slashed, many doctors have to see as many patients as possible just to continue practicing. Because of this and other pressures, doctors are increasingly moving away from insurance networks altogether. But it’s not just a question of network access. Doctors are increasingly turning away from primary care practice. The reason? The money just isn’t there, or at least that’s the thinking in the medical community. 

Between 1995 and 2004, median compensation for primary care physicians increased roughly 20%. However, during the same period, median compensation for specialists increased almost 38%—nearly double. Additionally, medical student enrollment as a whole is down as well. Students entering medical school has fallen from 7.3 persons per 100,000 in 1980 to 5.6 per 100,000 as of 2005. With malpractice insurance and medical school loans continually increasing, the students that are training for a career in medicine are now opting for specialty practices. 

However, it’s not all bad news. Necessity, as they say, is the mother of invention. There are a number of solutions that are being investigated. A trend toward primary care physicians only taking a limited number of patients, who pay an annual fee directly to their doctor, is gaining momentum. MedVIP is a program that takes the insurance company out of the loop, allowing doctors to take more time with a select number of patients. Costs range from $2,000 to $5,000 a year per person and the patient has access to their physician as well as a certain number of tests. It is important for people who take advantage of a MedVIP program to still have health insurance in place to cover the other medical care that may be needed, including catastrophic hospital care.

A more radical and certainly more controversial solution that is being tried is something called "shared appointments," which is exactly what it sounds like. Patients are seen in a group setting by a primary care physician. Since most insurance companies pay the same amount regardless of the time required to see a patient, it potentially has the ability to increase primary care doctors’ profitability. That’s all fine and dandy, but what about the party on the other end—the patients? Seems the patients win out as well, with most getting appointments sooner, according to the Boston Globe. The Globe examined the practice in one of its recent editions, which goes on to say, "Many patients, it turns out, are willing to sacrifice privacy and modesty for improved access to doctors." A survey conducted by a leading medical group that endorses this practice found that only 5% of people that participated in the shared appointments setting would not do it again. A full 77% would continue to be seen in a shared appointment setting with 15% of those surveyed unsure whether they would be willing to be seen in a shared setting. Patients sign confidentiality agreements to comply with HIPAA regulations on privacy. They also have private areas to change.

Lastly, evaluating a patient most cost-effectively via a telephone consultation (i.e. telephone nurse) has now moved into the virtual world. Online medical consulting is gaining ground, whereby patients can "live chat" with a physician and then be routed to the appropriate medical area in their hometown. Other online services include Q&A sections for common maladies, prescription ordering, as well as pricing for various hospital procedures.

With challenges come opportunities. As care gets more and more expensive and the availability of primary care doctors decrease, look for some shakeups in the way you access care in the future.

Until next time, stay healthy!
