New year’s is a time when people can begin anew. Mistakes or missed opportunities can be left on the side of the road. The new year brings a sense of hope and renewal. A time when the slate is wiped clean and the future is bright. While the past may be written in stone, the future hasn’t happened yet and as such, gives us a chance to make it better than the past. Some people have made a career out of trying to predict what we can expect for the upcoming year. Some predictions, like alien first-contact, simply make us chuckle. Others, like stock market turnarounds are hopeful and upbeat. Predicting what will happen is always risky. This column, I try to make sense of what our new president has in store for us in the health insurance market and the challenges and hurdles we can expect along the way. 

The biggest obstacle to implementing change to the nation’s healthcare system is cost. At the core of the new President’s health insurance proposal is a system where everyone who wants insurance can both get it and afford it. Simple enough on the surface. There are a few problems, however. If insurance companies are going to have to take everyone with health conditions, it makes sense that the insurance companies’ costs will go up, which usually means a higher monthly premium for the coverage. The other side of Mr. Obama’s plan is that the coverage will have to be affordable, which infers that it is not affordable now. So, the premiums will have to go down. See the problem?  Undertaking an overhaul of the health insurance market would make it the largest government health insurance program and is not a short-term proposal. The cost of anything that large has to be figured for the long-term. Someone who gets a 30-year mortgage, for example, is fairly sure that their income will support that payment for the next 30 years. The new President’s administration estimates the cost for the program to be $60 billion a year. By comparison, it’s helpful to look at the government’s current largest guaranteed-issue health plans, Medicare and Medicaid. Currently being funded by taxes, the government, and in the case of Medicare, monthly payments by plan participants, Medicare’s costs are expected to increase nearly 2 and a half times the money that will come in to pay for it. Until recently, the government paid 75% of the monthly cost for Medicare, with consumers paying 25%. Monthly payments for the consumer went from $54 in 2002 to over $78 in 2006. Starting in 2007, monthly costs are now based upon your household income, with the minimum amount for 2008 being $96.40 and the maximum all the way up to $238.40. In 2009, those costs will be even higher. The government is looking for ways to decrease costs for the health plan for those with no means to pay for it (Medicaid) well. Charging a small monthly cost and increasing co-pays are being looked into.

One way to decrease costs for the new healthcare plan is to eliminate redundancies, that is, not duplicating something that has already been done. An example is a patient having to give the same information to different doctors. The new President’s plan wants to have all that information available to other doctors so that care can be progressive, rather than rehashing the same thing over and over for a different doctor.  This is the "transparency" of medical information part of the plan. Preventing small things from becoming large, expensive procedures is another cost-saving measure. Preventive care figures to be a large component of the new plan, as well as healthy lifestyle education.

The health insurance and drug companies are taking part in the discussion as well. Any plan, they say, has to include a requirement to have everybody get coverage. Which, although it will inevitably be unpopular, actually makes sense. The cost of care becomes less expensive per person if you have more people paying. It only takes a thousand people paying a dollar to accumulate $1,000, but it takes $5 a person if only 200 people pay. Besides, if people know that they can get coverage any time they want, they’ll just wait until they are sick or need an expensive operation to buy the insurance. The problem will be one of enforcement. How do you make sure everyone has coverage?

Bottom line is it’s easy to figure out what’s wrong. It may even be easy to figure out how to fix it. The hard part is figuring out how to pay for it. My prediction? Challenges like these in addition to more immediate concerns like the war and the economy are going to delay implementation of Mr. Obama’s full health plan vision.

Until next time, stay healthy!
