The holidays are upon us! I had always wondered about what they call “Black Friday”—that Friday after Thanksgiving that is the biggest shopping day of the year—and decided to venture out to see what all the fuss was about. Suffice to say, I was mesmerized by the electric feeling in the air and was able to get some great bargains in the process. For many of us, the frantic shopping, wrapping, planning parties, sending cards, etc., can leave us feeling frazzled. When we finally can relax, the warmth and joy during this time usually leaves us with a feeling that it’s all worth it. For many people, however, the holidays do not bring joy. Mental health issues like depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and seasonal-affective disorder (SAD) can leave people feeling separated and lonely. Of course, there are effective therapies to deal with these conditions. Having access to them at affordable prices is a different story. 

Recently the state of Nebraska, seeking to avoid having babies left on hospital doorsteps or worse, passed a law designed to allow parents to legally abandon their newborn children if they could not care for them. While most states have similar laws, Nebraska (at the time) did not legally define what age a child could be. Since the laws passage, 34 children, mostly teens, were legally dropped off. A majority of them suffered from mental illness with 90 percent of their guardians seeking help before giving them up and, faced with no options, abandoning their children under the law. This example serves to underscore the grossly inadequate availability of mental health services. According to a study conducted by the National Center for Children in Poverty at Columbia University, children do not receive adequate care in one in five states. Of course, it’s not just children who suffer. Every year, one in ten Americans experiences some disability from a mental health disorder. According to the American Psychological Association, a three-year study of a major corporation found that more than half (60%) of employee absences were due to psychological problems.

So why don’t insurance companies offer better coverage? In a word, cost. Faced with consistently trying to earn a return for their shareholders, increasing medical costs nationwide, costly new technology and drugs, the last thing that insurance companies want to do increase the bottom line. They also have the mistaken notion that the "care" will be never-ending. It’s not as easy to ascertain whether a person’s mental illness is "cured" unlike like seeing a broken bone heal. Recent advances show that many mental illnesses have a biological component that is helping to turn the trend around. Of the companies that have mental health coverage, most limit the number of visits to a mental health professional, as well as limiting the time one can be in the hospital. 

Aren’t insurance companies required to cover mental health? On the federal level they are not. Since each state has its own Insurance Commissioner, it is up to the individual states to determine if insurance companies doing business in their state are required to cover mental illness. The federal government did pass a law in 1996 called “The Mental Health Parity Act" which disallowed insurance companies from having separate caps on mental conditions that were different from the regular policy maximums for physical health conditions. Prior to this, it was not uncommon to have only $5,000 in outpatient care available and $50,000 inpatient. Most caps for physical health conditions cap at $2 million or more.

So what can we do? Already the tide is changing. Health care reform has rarely generated as much interest as now. In March of this year, the House of Representatives passed a bill that evens the playing field for mental health conditions covered on health plans offered by employers. However much work still needs to be done. The House bill does not apply to health plans sponsored by an employer with 50 or fewer employees. Nor does it apply to coverage in the individual insurance market. The incoming administration has made it clear that expanded mental health parity will be part of their healthcare solution.

With the current focus on improving access and affordability of healthcare, including mental health care, hopefully next holiday season we’ll have more people excited about a new year on the horizon.

Until next time, stay healthy!
