So said George Washington when asked if he had cut down the family’s cherry tree.  Being our nation’s first president, for many George Washington represents the ideal in leadership. Although technology and a host of other things have changed drastically in the two centuries since he served, the basic process of electing our officials, who then make our laws, hasn’t changed all that much. This is particularly relevant now, as both Congress and many states’ legislatures are now in session, planning our laws.  It is this time that the people we elect submit BDRs (bill draft requests), which can then become bills, which can then become laws. Before a bill becomes a law however, it goes to a committee, which has meetings with "experts" and the general public who are both for and against the proposed law. This is because in a democracy, everyone has a voice and helps to keep our politicians honest (an oxymoron for some, to be sure). But it is more than that. It is an opportunity for all sides of particular law to hash out their differences and hopefully work in a spirit of cooperation. It is a fact that you can’t please everyone and it is the same for the legislative process.  For every law passed that helps someone, someone else is likely to be harmed from it. I experienced this firsthand just recently. 

Last week I had the pleasure (?) of testifying in my state’s capitol. I put a question mark after pleasure because, while it was exciting being involved in all the pomp and circumstance, seeing firsthand how our legislative process works, it was bittersweet as the bill I was testifying against is for a great cause that touches many lives (including a direct relative of mine) and would save the beneficiaries of the proposed legislation tens of thousands of dollars a year. So why did I testify against this bill ? Because I have "expert" knowledge about who would be harmed by the bill if it became law as it was written. Therein lies the distinction. Most laws are well intentioned, seeking to improve the lives of people. However, not knowing all the ramifications of a particular bill can have catastrophic consequences. In this particular instance, the proposed law would have made insurance companies pay for treatments that aren’t currently being covered, saving parents of kids stricken with this condition literally tens of thousands of dollars. Now you may be thinking, “Insurance companies aren’t people so why care if they have to pay for this?” And you’d be right. However, insurance companies get the money to pay for claims from the money they receive from people in the form of premiums. It’s helpful to think of the insurance company as a semi-inflated balloon. Squeeze the middle, and the air just goes somewhere else. Anywhere you squeeze that balloon, the air will pop up in another place. And so it is with premiums.  queeze the insurance company by making them pay for new treatments, somebody is going to have to pay for it.  In this particular instance, the people that would pay for this were primarily small business owners, those with between 2 and 50 employees. Large employers, unions, state employees were all exempt because of federal government laws that states don’t have the power to change.

I know many people think business owners should have enough money to pay for their employees’ healthcare.  I mean, in reality how much can premiums go up? Well, in this particular case, possibly 86% higher to be exact. Even without the economy in an uproar, that is a huge price tag.  But our legislators didn’t know that.  And that’s where "expert" testimony comes in.  It doesn’t make sense to work this hard to get something covered if the only people who would have to pay for it drop their health plans altogether. Then nobody has coverage.

Fortunately, this bill, I’m told will pass, but not without some serious changes to make it fair to everybody: the kids affected by this condition and their parents genuinely deserve it.  Which makes me glad, because I don’t like to be the bad guy.  I cannot tell a lie…that’s the truth.
