Summer is definitely over. The kids are back in school, the barbeques put away, the swimsuits packed up in the closet. Going through pictures of our summer vacations, I reminisced how fast it had come and gone. Even on vacation, there’s always something that has me thinking about health insurance. This summer was no different. On our trip to the Mexican Riviera, about the third day into our cruise, the loudspeakers throughout the ship announced that we would be making a brief, unexpected stop. Apparently someone had gotten severely ill and needed more involved care than what was available at the ship’s infirmary. While we certainly were thinking about the person’s well-being and wishing them a speedy recovery, I couldn’t help but think of the costs involved with medical care in a foreign country. And that is the subject this week’s column; making sure you’re covered when traveling outside the United States. 

If you’ve read some of my previous columns, you know that some health plans will cover you anywhere while others will only cover you in certain geographical areas. Even the plans that cover you anywhere will cost you more for your care than if you were on U.S. soil. Add to that costs that regular insurance typically doesn’t cover. Obviously our brief detour, taking the ship off course, having the local medical provider meet the ship and transporting the patient to shore all have costs involved which they typically pass on the patient. In addition to transportation costs, there are extra food and lodging for family members. Translation services may be necessary. All of these costs typically aren’t covered by regular insurance plans. For those and many other reasons, a travel policy when you go on trips is advisable.  

Travel policies are specialized policies that are generally short-term. They typically can be purchased a week or two at a time. (Immigration policies are also travel policies but can be renewed up to three years or so. They are typically used for foreign nationals, missionaries, foreign exchange students as well as ordinary U.S. citizens that are taking extended trips abroad). A note: Some of the travel policies that are offered by cruise lines or your travel agent aren’t health insurance at all but are ‘trip insurance’ policies that cover things like lost luggage, trip cancellation due to inclement weather, etc. While medical travel policies cover these things as well, be sure you know if the policy covers medical costs. 

Other items that people generally don’t think about while traveling are things like being reunited with your family (Emergency Reunion Expense) in the event of a medical emergency or the worst consequence, a death while on vacation. There are costs involved with bringing someone home (called Return of Mortal Remains) which travel policies cover. Most policies also have Accidental Death and Dismemberment coverage (called AD&D coverage) as part of their package.

The medical insurance part is usually a straight deductible and then coinsurance (typically 80/20). Because travel insurance has a definite ending point (when your trip is done) the exposure to the insurance company is less so the premiums are usually very affordable, even for low deductibles. Bear in mind, however that these plans usually have limits that are lower than what your regular health insurance may have. Also, because these policies are designed for the ‘what if’ scenarios while traveling, they won’t cover conditions you already have (called pre-existing conditions).

So, while I will be reminiscing about my summer vacation and planning for next year, remember, travel is just not for the summers. Many people travel during the off-season for better deals or take a trip for the holidays. A travel policy will give you the peace-of-mind to enjoy your much-deserved vacation and won’t overexpose you financially in the event of an unforeseen medical situation.

Until next time, stay healthy!
