When I was a child I used to read quite a bit. It was my way of escaping into worlds wondrous and unknown. I was particularly partial to sci-fi (as little boys often are) and of course wanted to be an astronaut. Alas, it wasn't to be so I took the next best thing of course...I became an insurance man. In reading those stories, I often came across the theme of human vs. machine. Stories like I, Robot (the movie of the same name starring Will Smith was based on an old book), WestWorld (itself made into a movie), and movies like the Terminator series were always throwing a cautionary scare on the dangers of letting machines get the upper hand. The morals of these movies were that machines should serve humankind and we should not rely on them to the point that we actually give up control. 

I bring this all up because there is a growing trend towards getting your health insurance online. Don't get me wrong, machines are great for certain tasks and life would certainly be more difficult without them. Computers are great at crunching and sorting numbers. Therein lies its strength...and weakness. When you go online for an insurance quote, what you'll get is a listing of lowest price to highest price and not much else. Some sites may have limited help features and may even have a "live" help desk staffed by agents with knowledge of the basics. With health insurance, there are vast differences between policies, benefits offered, state laws governing those benefits and policies, and tax considerations that don't affect rate-based insurances like auto and home insurance. These things should be taken into account by a savvy agent. Your agent should ask about your health history...before taking an application. You don't want to apply for insurance only to get declined. Have your agent do a pre-screen. If they don't know what that is, find another agent. In addition to health considerations, a good agent will ask you certain other questions like: Do you travel often or are you planning to move? Do you have a doctor that you want to continue to use? (Pediatrician for the kids, OB/GYN, various specialists, etc.) Are you involved in sports or outside activities? A good agent should be able to answer the questions that you don't know to ask. 

So, what is the cost of having an agent help you? Answer: Nothing. 

Where a travel agent may have slightly higher prices than trips purchased online, the health insurance agent is prohibited from adding (or subtracting) money from your price. It's also not in the best interest of the insurance companies to have different rates for direct-business or agent-sold policies. With agents being a major marketing force for insurance companies it's easy to see that a high proportion of agents wouldn't provide a certain company if they knew that the client could get a lower rate by going direct.

So, what are the faults of using humans for the purchase of your health insurance needs? The two biggest I see is a lack of knowledge and greed. 

Insurance people are commission-based. Which isn't necessarily a bad word. Commission-based is another term for pay-for-performance. If they weren't good at what they do, they wouldn't make any money and would leave the business. The problem I see is that typically insurance agents try to do too many things. While having your auto/home/IRA's/health/life insurance with one person may sound easier, it's hard to be an expert in all those fields. That's why the trend (just like doctors) is towards specialization. Agents all have to pass a test to get licensed. You should check what the agent has done career-wise over and above their licensing (NOT counting mandatory continuing education). A good indicator is a professional insurance designation. While initial insurance licensing may take a week or two to complete, professional designations are typically college-level courses and take two or more years to complete the whole program. Other criteria to look at: How many clients do they have with health policies? What percentage of their business is health insurance? How long have they been in the industry? There are exceptions, but agents that have less than two years in the business typically have been supported by their managers. Membership in a professional trade organization is another good indicator that your agent takes their job seriously. If you find an agent that meets these criteria, the "greed" factor will be greatly reduced so you can feel comfortable that they are thinking about your pocketbook and not theirs.

So at the end of the day, when all is said and done, the internet is a great tool when controlled by us, not the other way around.

Until next time, stay healthy!

