The last few weeks, we've talked about Medicare and the options to enhance its coverage. In doing so, we compared the original Medicare program to an old house. While any house will keep you safe from the elements, some old houses can be drafty, with holes in the roof and walls that expose you to particularly bad storms. Likewise, Medicare by itself will cover you when your claims aren't too severe, but will leave you quite exposed if your health has to weather a bad "storm." 

The options we looked at were supplements to Medicare, often called MediGap plans because they were designed to help cover the holes or gaps in Medicare's coverage. As such, they were not actually part of Medicare but were add-ons. Besides being fairly expensive, they don't allow for outpatient prescription drugs coverage. There are other ways to protect yourself from the holes in your original Medicare coverage besides these MediGap plans; they oftentimes cover outpatient prescription drugs without the necessity of purchasing a separate drug program. This is the way they work: Using our house example, instead of plugging the holes in your existing, leaky house you can instead move to a whole new house. Or in this case, a community of townhomes called Medicare Advantage plans, or sometimes just Medicare Part C. These plans generally cost much less than a MediGap plan, oftentimes (most often with the HMO programs) taking what you pay for your Medicare Part B premium as payment in full or charging an additional, minimal fee per month. As such, they tend to be a cost-effective option for seniors on a budget. Generally however, you must stay within a network of physicians (most notably on the HMO and PPO options). 

Just like townhome communities, different plans have different benefits and different rules for using the plans. However, according to Medicare.gov, "Medicare Advantage Plans (must) provide all of your Part A (Hospital Insurance) and Part B (Medical Insurance) coverage and must cover medically necessary services. They generally offer extra benefits, and many include Medicare prescription drug coverage (Part D). Medicare Advantage Plans include the following: • Medicare Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) Plans • Medicare Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) Plans • Medicare Private Fee-for-Service (PFFS) Plans • Medicare Special Needs Plans (SNP) (and) • Medicare Medical Savings Account (MSA) Plans. Medicare Cost Plans are a type of HMO that are available in certain areas of the country. You can join a Medicare Cost Plan anytime it's accepting new members. In a Medicare Cost Plan, (a big difference is) you can join even if you only have Part B. If you go to a non-network provider, the services are covered under the Original Medicare Plan. You pay the Medicare Part A and Part B coinsurance and deductibles. You can either get your Medicare prescription drug coverage from the plan (if offered), or you can buy a stand-alone Medicare Prescription Drug Plan to add prescription drug coverage. "

All the rules for getting out of the community (changing plans) are the same. You can switch to another plan every November 15th through December 31st. If you are eligible for a Medicare Advantage plan, you can switch to another Medicare Advantage plan from January 1st through March 31st of each year; however your prescription drug coverage may be affected. Speaking of prescription drugs, Medicare may also allow you to switch plans under special circumstances during other times of the year, such as if you become eligible for extra help paying for your prescription drugs, go into a nursing home, or move out of your plan's coverage area.

Next week we'll finish up our series on Medicare with the last part of Medicare (that is also the newest part). It covers prescription drug medication and is called (appropriately enough) Medicare Part D. 

Until next time, be healthy!

