What a topsy-turvy month this has been! I recently had the privilege of meeting with legislators in my state’s capital (Carson City, Nevada), to discuss various legislation as it pertains to the health insurance market. With legislation like the current SCHIP expansion and Stimulus Bill dominating the discussions, one small piece of legislation that didn’t make the national headlines stuck in my mind. That legislation (HR2851) was deemed “Michelle’s Law.” 

Now, you must be thinking, how did Michelle Obama, the first lady, get a law passed that bore her name? The law was actually named after a young lady who was stricken with cancer while attending college, named Michelle. Cancer at any age is terrifying, maybe even more so when we see our children contract it. Michelle and her parents were no different. They went to oncologists and started her on fourteen chemotherapy treatments every other week, lasting 48 hours apiece. So, while Michelle and her parents were preparing to hunker down and battle this ominous disease, they were blindsided by something they hadn’t even considered. As if a diagnosis of cancer at such a young age weren’t enough, their insurance company informed them that Michelle could no longer stay on her parents’ policy. How is that possible? To see why, it’s helpful to look at how insurance companies in most states treat students on parents’ policies.

Currently, health insurance coverage for an eligible dependent child terminates on their 19th birthday. Exceptions are made if that child is considered a full-time student, but only until the age of twenty-four, at which time they will be required to get their own policy. The key here is full-time student status, which typically is 12 credit hours or more per semester (some require up to 18 credit hours enrolled). The insurance companies didn’t take severe medical situations, like Michelle’s, into consideration. So while Michelle was battling cancer, she had to attend school full-time in order to stay on her parents’ policy so that the insurer would pay for her cancer treatments. 

Now Michelle could have applied for COBRA to continue her coverage, but according to www.michelleslaw.com, the premiums would have been unaffordable for her family to pay. Michelle also could have qualified for her state’s risk-pool insurance, but that was deemed inadequate, with high co-pays and other limitations. Michelle also didn’t qualify for Medicaid. This was a classic case of someone falling through the cracks.

Michelle’s parents, with the help of doctors and legislators, made her plight known. In 2006 a law was passed in Michelle’s home state of New Hampshire that allowed students who become seriously ill while on their parents’ health insurance policies to take a medical leave of absence up to 12 months from college. Beginning on October 9, 2009, Michelle’s Law became federal law so that no student will ever have to endure what Michelle endured, all the while bravely battling cancer. Health plans have to comply with this new law beginning on their next renewal on or after October 9, 2009. For plans that renew on a calendar year basis, starting January 1, 2010 is when they have to comply. Sadly, Michelle never saw the legislation pass that bore her name. She passed away in November of 2005, finally succumbing to the cancer she fought so hard against with a Bachelor’s Degree in hand. 

Sometimes it’s the common voice that rises up to be heard. For many, the new presidency brings with it a message of hope for the future. For college kids with severe medical conditions and their parents, hope is something they desperately cling to. At least now they can concentrate on beating their respective illnesses, without worrying about how they will pay for it.
