Now that we’re about to start a new year, it’s a strong possibility that we’ll see some changes in the health insurance industry. What is a certainty is that the industry is poised for a shakeup of epic proportions; it’s just a matter of working out the kinks. Whether it will transpire this year, with all the challenges, will be interesting to say the least. With all the proposed changes to our healthcare system, it’s important to understand what is not likely to change. It also allows us to start fresh, with an understanding of basic insurance terminology.

While the monthly amount you ultimately pay to the insurance company may change, the concept will not. In order to access health care, you will have to continue to pay a premium. Premium is the term for the monthly cost you pay to the insurance company to have coverage. If you can’t afford the coverage, various subsidies will be put in place to assist you in paying all or part of the premium. It’s important to understand that the premium is a cost to you for the coverage, not the fees associated with accessing the plan.  If you don’t use your insurance at all, you will still have to pay the premium. Accessing coverage, or using your insurance, will have it’s own costs on top of the premiums you are paying.

One of the most basic concepts that is sure to still be around is a deductible. This is your portion of the medical bill that you need to pay before the insurance company starts to pay. It typically is only paid once per year; usually on a calendar-year basis. That means from January 1rst through December 31st of the current year. If you pay all of your deductible by February, for example, you will have satisfied the deductible requirement for the rest of the year. Starting next January 1rst, you will then start back at zero. It’s important to realize two things with deductibles; you only pay the deductible if you have care and if the bill is less you only pay the lesser amount. The amounts less than the deductible are added up until you reach the deductible amount. After the deductible, insurance companies then share the cost of care with you. This is called co-insurance. It is usually thought of as an 80/20 plan, although many plans have other ratios such as 70/30, 85/15, 50/50 or even 100/0.  If all you have to pay is your deductible, after which the insurance company pays the rest, then you are on a 100/0 coinsurance plan. What’s important about coinsurance is that you have caps, called out-of-pocket, on what you can pay. That means that if you have a $201,000 bill, you won’t have to pay $40,000 on an 80/20 plan with a $1000 deductible. (201,000-1,000=200,000. 200,000 x .20=40,000). Typical out-of-pockets are $1000, $2000 or $3000. The principle of paying the lesser amount only until you meet the total amount needed to satisfy your out-of-pocket applies here as well. Coinsurance is also figured on a calendar-year basis. The biggest mistake people make is thinking they have to pay all of the deductible and coinsurance amounts before anything is paid. 

Regular accessing of care can get expensive if you have to pay the first $1000 or so. Next week we’ll look at some more insurance terms and concepts to see how routine care, doctor visits, and prescriptions likely will be covered.

Until next time, stay healthy!
