At first glance, the above title of this week’s column may seem to be the title of a movie slated for release later this year. It’s true; there is a film by the same name that is currently in post-production, (which is the technical term used in film-making that describes how a film is edited for final release). However, this is not a column dedicated to movies, but rather one about health insurance. So how does this relate to the topic at hand? As we’ll see, there are many similarities (and bad puns) about the flurry of activity in the branches of government relating to health insurance, earning the title of "fast and furious."

The last few weeks we’ve looked at some aspects of the government’s possible changes to our healthcare system. Specifically, we’ve touched upon the State Children’s Insurance Program (or SCHIP) and the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (or COBRA). Since I’ve written those columns, major changes have been proposed and one is in "post-production" (COBRA) while another has just been officially "released" (SCHIP). President Obama actually signed the SCHIP bill into law February 4th. Seeing as the new law is a "remake" (like the above-titled movie), it’s helpful to briefly revisit what the whole program is about.

The SCHIP program is a state and federally co-funded program designed to insure eligible children. Originally passed in 1997, it was supposed to expire March 31st, but both the Senate and the House passed versions of a bill that would extend the program for another 4 ½ years. Both bills were "super-charged" versions of the original legislation. In Hollywood, it’s not uncommon for movie budgets to go into the tens of millions (or more). The new SCHIP law is expected to cost over $31 billion and is expected to add over 4 million kids to the program. Funding will be "fueled" primarily by a 62-cent cigarette tax increase. This will increase funding both for actual benefits and to assist the individual states in increasing awareness of the program. 

High-performing states (those states that increase enrollment into their SCHIP plans above certain levels) will also get additional federal money for the program. A child is considered eligible if their family’s income is up to 3 times the federal poverty rate. To put that into perspective, a family of four can make up to $21,200 and still be at the poverty level per 2008 levels (Alaska and Hawaii even more). Three times that is over $60,000. Additionally, pregnant women are eligible to be covered as well. 

The law also has a "fast track" (their name, not mine) provision to help get eligible kids covered quickly. Everything about this law shows that America is finally ready to make good on its promise of healthcare for all. Besides expanding the program for citizens, documented legal immigrants’ children (and pregnant women) are now eligible immediately, without waiting the mandatory five years residency for governmental assistance programs. However, proof of legal immigration status will be required upon renewal of benefits. Expansion of dental coverage to allow coverage of children whose parents have health coverage through an employer, but no dental coverage is now law under SCHIP. The amended Senate bill required the establishment of a Children’s Access Commission, similar to Medicare’s Payment Advisory Commission, to evaluate children’s access to care and payment policies in Medicaid and SCHIP and is now law as well. 

So for fast-paced, exciting action, sit back, grab some (lite) popcorn and tune in next week. Same time. Same channel. (And stay healthy).
