On February 16, 2009 history was made. No, it wasn’t a cure for cancer or the landing of someone on Mars, but for many in this depressed economy, I’m not exaggerating when I say that it could be a lifesaver. With a price tag of over $790 billion, it could very well fund a trip to the red planet. Of course, I’m not talking about medical breakthroughs or science fiction, I’m talking about the HR-1 bill, commonly known as the Stimulus Package. With that high price tag, it makes this the most ambitious social program since President Roosevelt’s New Deal. There were many items that made it into the final law, but we’ll only talk about the ones that deal with health insurance and health-related issues. As with any legislation, especially one with so many parts as this one, it is impossible to fully explain even the major provisions in one column. So for this week, we’re just going to touch on the highlights of the law. Look for more detail on each provision in the coming weeks.

For many, especially people that had been laid-off from their jobs since September of last year, the biggest impact will in their continuation of COBRA. As discussed in past columns, COBRA allows the continuation of your health insurance through your past employer. The biggest problem with COBRA was that people couldn’t afford it. This law will help with that.

With times as tough as they are, more people are finding that they may qualify for the low-income health insurance called Medicaid. However, you don’t have to be destitute to qualify for Medicaid. Another area that families may see assistance with is low-cost health insurance for children and pregnant women. This is actually a part of the SCHIP law that was signed into law back on February 4th. Many states fund their SCHIP programs through Medicaid. What the Stimulus Package law did was to provide (much) more matching funding for Medicaid.

Medical technology systems were all in the news and the Stimulus Bill has funding to help doctors and hospitals comply with electronic sharing of medical records. In studies this electronic sharing has shown tremendous cost savings by avoiding redundant tests as well as reducing medical errors. While some people were concerned with privacy issues, nothing has generated more controversy than something called “comparative effectiveness research.” Everyone from talk radio hosts to print media were screaming like Chicken Little that the sky was falling. Nothing could be further from the truth, as we’ll see in future columns.

For workers who have lost their jobs due to outsourcing their jobs to foreign countries, an extension of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) programs and the Health Coverage Tax Credit will help them afford healthcare.

Even a sci-fi fan like myself can’t argue that this is better than landing someone on Mars. But, wait. There’s some good news for cancer survivors, as well as anyone who has ever been affected by heart disease, Parkinson’s disease or Alzheimer’s disease. The new law also has a provision granting $8.5 billion for biomedical research into these horrible diseases by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Additionally, another $1.5 billion will be earmarked for NIH to renovate university facilities.

Rocket ships not withstanding, we sure are seeing some light-speed changes in this health insurance landscape since Mr. Obama took office. Be sure to tune in next week to keep up-to-date on all the provisions and how they could affect you.

Until next time, stay healthy!
