The last two weeks we’ve looked at how different scenarios play out when a person loses their job under the new COBRA continuance provisions under the Stimulus Package law that recently passed.  Specifically, we looked at how someone who went with COBRA coverage when it was initially offered to them before the law took effect and also how it affected someone who initially didn’t take COBRA because of the expense before the law was enacted, but then decided to take the time remaining on their COBRA coverage with their employer paying the subsidy. A quick review of the key points of the law for this week’s challenge.

The employee must have been involuntarily terminated sometime between September 1st, 2008 and December 31, 2009.
The employer has to subsidize everyone that is eligible for COBRA 65% starting March 1, 2009. (Employers get a credit against payroll taxes).
The subsidy is only payable for nine months.
If a person becomes eligible for other coverage, the subsidy ends (doesn’t matter whether or not they actually take the other coverage).
The actual time frame for them to keep COBRA hasn’t changed (18 months most instances).
These next few examples hit some of the finer points of the law and have a couple of twists, with a doozy at the end. See if you know the answer before reading it.

Example 1: Marvin recently quit his job at the pet food factory. He was given his COBRA notice that stated he had 60 days to elect his COBRA. He decides he can afford the COBRA if his employer subsidizes the premium 65% under the new law. However, when he gets his COBRA bill, he sees that the premium isn’t less at all. What can Marvin do?
A) Nothing
B) Appeal the decision
C) Get a job with another company and get them to pay the subsidy for his COBRA

The simple answer is A) Nothing. He can always appeal the decision (B) to the Department of Labor (which has only 15 days to rule), but because he voluntarily left his original company, it is pretty cut and dry. The third answer is kind of a trick question. If Marvin starts with a new company and gets on their health plan, but is then fired or laid-off, the new company would have to subsidize his COBRA premiums for the first nine months he is on COBRA with the new company.

Example 2: Suppose Marvin does exactly what we described above. He is now on COBRA with his second company. Marvin then gets hired by a small business which offers him health insurance coverage immediately, but he has to pay 50% of the cost. His COBRA coverage through his second employer only requires him to pay 35% of the cost so he declines the coverage through his new employer and keeps his COBRA coverage. His old employer finds out about this through the grapevine. What can his old employer do ?
A) Nothing
B) Stop paying the COBRA subsidy
C) Terminate Marvin’s coverage

Answer? Believe it or not, it is A) Nothing. Under the new law, it is the EMPLOYEE that is responsible for providing notification in writing that he is now eligible for other coverage, at which point the employer can stop paying the subsidy. Marvin is still able to keep the COBRA, only he would have to pay all of the cost. Here’s the doozy—Just because Marvin doesn’t provide written notice and still receives the subsidy, he can be ultimately fined 110% of the amount of subsidy he received. 

Best thing to do when you lose your job is to work with your HR department very closely. If in doubt, contact the Department of Labor for clarification.

Until next time, stay healthy!

