Continuing our day at the races (see Fast and Furious, Part II), the changes affecting our healthcare system are coming at breakneck speed. President Obama expressed his hope for the future on February 23, his first address to the joint session of Congress. In his speech he outlined his agenda for the future, commenting that “there three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future: energy, healthcare and education.” He has already jump-started our reform of the healthcare industry with historic legislation.

As everyone knows by now, ARRA (aka the Stimulus Package) has passed. We touched upon the major points as it relates to health insurance. This column we delve a bit deeper into the actual provisions and changes. First up is the Federal law called COBRA. As we found out in previous columns, COBRA is the law that allows an employee that loses his or her job to continue on their former employer’s health plan. The time frame for keeping that coverage is generally 18 months (and in some cases involving divorce or death of the primary insured, 36 months). That hasn’t changed. What has changed is who can elect COBRA and the cost of the coverage. 

The first part is easy. While people have 60 days after they receive notice from the employer to elect to continue their health plan via the COBRA law, the new ARRA law has a provision that will allow anybody who was involuntarily terminated (i.e. laid-off) since September 1st of last year to retroactively choose COBRA. The key here is involuntarily termed. If you quit, you wouldn’t be eligible to go back to your employer and say you had a change of heart and wanted to continue the coverage. This is important to prevent someone who had initially declined COBRA, only to be stricken with some illness after the fact, to suddenly change their minds and get back on a health plan. This was not the intent of the new law. The new law, as part of the stimulus package, is targeted towards people affected by the recession. The employee who quit made a conscious decision to leave their employer, which (usually, but not always) means they must have had other means of support (i.e. another job) at which they may have coverage. Traditionally, COBRA coverage wouldn’t differentiate between voluntary and involuntary separation from your company. The difference is that the new law is allowing people who lost their jobs due to the recession since September to enroll on a COBRA plan.

This naturally begs the question, why would someone who was eligible for COBRA in September and didn’t take it then, change their minds and elect to go on the plan ? That is the second change in the law: cost. Currently the majority of Americans consider COBRA expensive. And it is. However it is negligibly more (2%) of the actual cost of the coverage. The difference is that your employer has to subsidize your coverage usually 50% or more while you are working. When you leave your employer, all of the premium (plus the 2% for administration expenses) is on your shoulders. This proved too expensive for the majority of Americans, especially if you lost your job. What the new law does is help subsidize the cost of the COBRA continuation. Here is where the House and Senate compromised. In the original bill, the House version wanted a 65% subsidy for 12 months. The Senate version wanted a 50% subsidy for 9 months. What ended up passing was the COBRA would be subsidized 65% for 9 months of coverage. It’s important to understand that the actual COBRA time frame isn’t being extended, even for the people who were terminated from September 1st. If your COBRA was supposed to end 18 months from September 1st, it will still end on that date.

Great strides have been made in the reformation of our healthcare system. However, it’s still too early to take a victory lap. However, with all this action, I can’t wait to see what’s around the next corner.

Until next time, stay healthy.
