I like learning new words. And every year there seems to be more to learn. The folks over at Merriam-Webster added more than 100 words to their dictionary in 2008. Last year saw a whole new lexicon of words; however, one word was plastered all over the newspapers. It was talked about (and spoofed) on late night television shows. It was discussed on talk radio. It was debated in classrooms. The interesting thing about this particular word however is that it wasn’t new. In fact, it was first used in the year 1175. This word has given hope to millions of Americans. It’s the word that helped President Obama get elected to the presidency. That word is change. The word, according to Merriam-Webster means to make the form, nature, content, future course, etc., of (something) different from what it is; to transform. And the American people are hungry for a change. Almost overnight, change was everywhere. Because with change comes the hope of a new day. And the first of many proposed changes in the health insurance industry saw the coming of the dawn in January. 

As everyone knows, a major goal of the new administration is healthcare for all. One of the problems is the cost of such programs. January saw strides made to address both coverage and cost issues. 

The first, coverage, was the extending of the State Children Health Insurance Plan (or SCHIP), which was slated to expire March 31st of this year. While not yet law, President Obama has indicated he will sign any legislation regarding extending the SCHIP program into law. The SCHIP program is a joint effort by both the states and federal government to provide healthcare coverage for children. Each state’s programs are different but they typically cover health, dental and vision care. Unlike Medicaid, the income levels at which people can qualify is much greater than what Medicaid allows.

Medicaid also is seeing potential change. While a necessary social program for the less fortunate, there is also a temptation to abuse it. A pilot program is being rolled out to 10 states that is based upon the Health Savings Account programs currently being marketed. HSAs are health insurance programs that have high deductibles with no co-pays. After the deductible is met, the insurance company then pays the cost of care. The attraction is that an insured person can deposit their deductible into a savings account, generating interest, and also write it off their taxes, like an IRA. 

Unlike an IRA, they can make withdrawals at any age provided it is for medical expenses, dental expenses and the like, with no penalty. While similar to Cafeteria plans available through employer plans, unlike employer plans, the insureds don’t lose the money deposited if they don’t use it in a calendar year…it simply rolls over to the next year. As such, people tend to avoid unnecessary medical treatment that is so common when people think that someone else is paying for their healthcare (i.e. the insurance company). It also gets people involved in their healthcare, questioning tests, medications, and looking for the best use of their HSA dollars. 

What is being proposed is something called Health Opportunity Accounts and it will allow 10 states to receive federal-matching funds of $1,000 for children and $2,500 for adults for healthcare needs. If the funds go unused, they will be available for the recipient’s future needs. If someone becomes ineligible for Medicaid, then the former recipient can claim up to 75 percent of the funds in the account for the purchase of private insurance. The hope is that consumerism and an awareness of actual healthcare costs will serve to deflate the rampant spending within Medicaid.

Change is inevitable. With the right kind of change we have started down the path to affordable healthcare for all.

Until next week stay healthy!
