The last few weeks we looked at how the health insurance industry currently works and what may change and what may stay the same when President Obama’s healthcare vision takes shape. Some people wonder how that will look and whether the health insurance companies will be able to survive it. Certainly there will be insurance companies that will leave the health insurance market to pursue other insurance opportunities, like life and disability insurance policies. However, the health insurance industry has been around for a fairly long time. During that time it has changed in response to various market pressures. Some have been successful; some have not. The biggest challenge is how to manage the costs and still provide quality care. Over time, different healthcare companies have tried different ways of managing costs, leading to our current system. This week we look at the different models of how we access care now and what will likely survive the President’s proposed changes.

If you work for an employer who provides health insurance or if you’re under age 65 and have an individual health insurance plan currently, it’s probably one (or a combination) of the following types of plans: Preferred Provider plans (PPOs), Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) or a Traditional plan. A PPO plan helps to provide cost-effective care for you and minimizes the costs to the insurance company. The insurance company pays the contracted healthcare providers (the preferred providers) a discounted amount for their services, which they then pass the savings on to you. They do this by giving you co-pays (flat fees you pay for care like doctor visits, labs, X-rays, etc.) and/or having you pay a lower monthly premium amount. Any major medical care is subject to a deductible and coinsurance. Coinsurance is the percentage amount you pay of your bill after you pay your deductible, after which the insurance company then pays 100% of the bill.

Traditional plans were the original type of health insurance, but now are usually part of a PPO plan, where they are labeled “Out-of-Network.” There are no co-pays; to access care, you need to pay the deductible after which you pay your coinsurance The advantage of this type of plan is that you are free to use it with any licensed healthcare provider. The disadvantage is that there are limited cost-containment measures and with the cost of healthcare so high, the insurance company has to find a way to manage those costs, most often by passing them on to you. They do this by increasing the amount you have to pay for care (on PPO plans) or by having a much higher monthly premium (on stand-alone traditional plans).  

Lastly, an HMO takes cost-cutting to a new level by encouraging wellness care and utilizing one doctor who coordinates all of your care. He or she controls what specialists you need to see. The insurance company must authorize all tests and procedures. The advantages of HMOs are the low cost for the patient to access care. All care received, including hospitalizations, are accessed by paying a flat fee. 

In theory, all these plans work. In the real world, theories seldom go as planned. Traditional plans have become cost-prohibitive. PPOs don’t encourage wellness care, so people tend to wait for a problem to develop which takes more resources (money) to treat. HMOs oftentimes are too concerned with cost-cutting , leading to delayed testing, long waits for procedures and less time with your doctor. 

So what does this all mean? 

Any system that the government puts in place will have some sort of authorization procedure for services to be sure they are necessary. Wellness care, a staple of both presidential campaigns, will be expanded. Whether that will take the form of rebates for being healthy or engaging in healthy activities is unknown at this time. One point of contact (a primary doctor) will most likely be a part of any government program to reduce duplicate tests and procedures. Sounds like an HMO to me.

While any government plan will most likely look like an HMO, other plans will still be available for those that don’t need to take advantage of the governmental insurance exchange. As such, we can expect our PPOs to still be around, but with more oversight to eliminate unnecessary procedures and increased wellness care.

All of this is conjecture of course. The future of healthcare will certainly be interesting to watch in the coming year. Tune in regularly to follow upcoming developments as we get closer to universal healthcare becoming a reality.

Until next time, stay healthy!
