Last week we talked about current barriers to getting health insurance and what could likely change under President Obama’s administration, with his promise of health coverage for all. This week we continue that discussion on current options when you lose coverage through an employer and how that may change with any new developments from the new administration.

The way it is now, if you work for an employer that offers health insurance and you’re let go, you are able to continue your coverage for 18 months (36 if due to a qualifying event like divorce or death), providing your former employer is subject to the COBRA laws. Employers with more than 19 employees (whether or not they are on the health plan) are required to comply with COBRA. There is a misconception about COBRA. People seem to think that COBRA is a government-sponsored program. That is not true. COBRA is simply legislation designed to help people stay insured by allowing them to stay on an employer’s plan after they leave for a period of time. Another misconception that seems to be pretty universal is that COBRA coverage is very expensive. Of course cost is relative; it is interesting to point out that COBRA coverage is only 2% more than what the premium (total monthly cost for the coverage, including employer’s portion) is. That means that if the total cost of your insurance per month is $300, then your premium under COBRA is only $306 monthly. Not a big difference. Where it does differ, of course, is that you are footing the entire monthly cost without any help from your former employer. Put another way, if your car insurance is $150 a month and it goes to $306 a month that certainly is quite an increase and anybody would call that expensive. The cost for the actual insurance coverage is $300, but as a benefit for working for an employer, the employer pays at least half the cost. No wonder people have sticker shock when they leave an employer. What IS expensive is coverage after your COBRA expires if you are considered uninsurable. A 1996 law made it possible for people to automatically get health insurance coverage after their COBRA ends, but it is usually very cost prohibitive.

This is just conjecturing of course, but I foresee at least the concept of COBRA still being around after any overhaul of the system. The prices should go down because one of the cornerstones of President Obama’s campaign promises was to make the insurance affordable. Just as COBRA only costs 2% more than the actual coverage, if prices go down, COBRA goes down. Who decides what is “affordable” remains to be seen. The other options could be a continued tax credit for employers to keep terminated employees on (just like retiree benefits currently) or automatically being accepted into other insurance companies’ plans upon termination from the employer’s plan.

What if you work for a company that has less than 20 employees? Here is where it is less clear and hopefully a national system will do the most good. Companies with less than 20 employees are not subject to Federal COBRA laws. They are subject to each individual state’s laws. Most states have different mechanisms allowing for coverage after you leave an employer that is not subject to COBRA. But it is a potpourri with no standardized coverages or rules from state-to-state. A federal program could definitely make the options less intimidating.

This is just one aspect of the current health insurance system and what may change if and when it is overhauled. Tune in next week for more on possible changes.

Until next time, stay healthy! 