The last two weeks we looked at some things that weren’t likely to change with the expected shakeup in the health insurance industry courtesy of the incoming administration. This week we look at some of the items that are considered the cornerstones of any new legislation and are likely to change.

The first, underwriting, is the process whereby an insurance company ascertains the risk posed by taking a person onto their plans and the appropriate monthly cost (or premium) they need to charge to hedge against that risk. Depending upon the state you live in, current legislation allows the insurance company several options if you were judged to be a “poor” risk by the insurance company. Being judged a “poor risk” usually meant you had some pre-existing health conditions. Pre-existing conditions are conditions you had that began before you applied for the insurance policy. Even if you don’t have a pre-existing condition when you apply for a policy, you may be subject to a pre-existing condition clause by the insurance company. It generally states that if you have a particular condition sometime within the six months of when the new policy goes into effect, the insurance company can hold off paying claims for that condition for a year. If you still have the condition when you apply, or if the condition was severe enough, an insurance company could take you in on their plan with an exclusion rider, a rate-up, or you could be declined coverage altogether. 

An exclusion rider allows an insurance company to deny payment for a certain condition up front, meaning they will pay for all other conditions usually covered on their policy but the excluded condition. Think of it as a long-term pre-existing condition clause that can last two years, five years, or for the life of the policy. Unfortunately, the excluded condition oftentimes is the reason a person applied for coverage in the first place. I often hear people say, “If they won’t cover my diabetes (or pending surgery, or heart condition, etc.) what do I need the insurance for?” This makes sense logically and morally, but would spell financial devastation for an insurance company if some form of subsidies or other protections weren’t put in place. 

One of the other options, a rate-up, partially addresses this. Most insurance is age-rated, meaning that a healthy 25-year-old male is charged the same as every other 25-year-old male applying to the same company, but less than say, a 56-year-old male. If a person’s health condition puts them at a higher risk of using the insurance than someone else of similar age, a rate-up (or increase in that person’s monthly premium) may allow the insurance company to offer coverage but still hedge their risk. The credit industry works the same way by charging different interest rates based upon a person’s credit score; people with a less attractive credit rating pay a higher interest rate than someone who’s credit score is higher. If you change (or ignore) this basic principle without adequate safeguards, the system could collapse. Many people in the financial industry blame extending high mortgages (credit) to persons without the means to pay for the stepped-up rate later on for the current financial crisis. Whether or not that is true, it is important that whatever changes come with the current administration, that they take into account the long-term consequences and costs. That’s why we’ll see some compromises in any legislation that guarantees coverage for all. 

Next week we continue the discussion on basic health insurance ideas and what we can expect to change (and stay the same) for the coming year.

Until next time, stay healthy!
