Some books are unforgettable but trying to remember a full year's reading? Impossible.

So make a note. If alongside a calendar date like Feb. 5, say, you scribble, "finished The Wild Blue," the Allied bomber missions of World War II will roar back to life in Stephen Ambrose's vivid reporting. 

Alan Greenspan had a good book out in 2008, then he ruined it. But the economy ruined it first. "The Age of Turbulence" tells of the ex-Federal Reserve chairman's life and ideas in surprisingly sprightly prose. But housing collapsed, Wall Street crashed, and the guru's easy monetary policy all those years looked stupid. Then he himself looked stupid. He confessed to a congressional committee how buffaloed he was at free markets flunking out like that. The icon became an I-can't.

A lot of the year's best reading was military. Not about Iraq, not yet. 

But going back, "Stalingrad" by Antony Beevor clarified the incredible slaughter that it took to stop Hitler armies in World War II. Poet Robert Graves captured the trench miseries of World War I indelibly in "Good-Bye to All That." T.S. Hamerow's "Why We Watched" dissected the failure by so many to stop the genocide of Europe's Jews in the Holocaust. Chris Bohjalian's novel "Skeletons at the Feast" captured WWII refugees fleeing those savage "liberators," the Russians.

"Theirs Was the Kingdom" was tops among biographies and memoirs read, not necessarily new. It was the story of Reader's Digest founders DeWitt and Lila Wallace, who briefly ran their newborn publishing phenomenon from Pittsburgh. "Felix Frankfurter Reminisces and Lazy B," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's tale of growing up on a cattle ranch in Arizona, led to a spate of reading about the Supreme Court. 

Jeffrey Toobin's "The Nine" was well reviewed but mean in its leftish slant. Much better was "My Grandfather's Son," the memoir of Justice Clarence Thomas, which in turn led to Booker T. Washington's "Up From Slavery," a 100-year-old classic, clear as a bell. 

Pittsburgh area writers joined the book parade. Lois R. Allen's "All We Really Needed" puts you there as a child growing up in McKeesport in the 1930s Depression. Retired Pitt Professor Raymond Richman and his sons hit hard at the Chinese assault on U.S. manufacturing in "Trading Our Future Away."

For pure pleasure, library shelves yielded Beryl Markham's "West With the Night," a superbly written memoir of the first woman to fly solo east to west across the Atlantic (Lindbergh did it the other way); "Music to My Ears," witty essays by late critic Deems Taylor; Al Capp's "Hardhat Bedtime Essays" (the Lil Abner cartoonist could write, too) and Meyer Levin's novel of early Israel, "The Settlers."

No need to resolve to read more books in the new year -- a habitual consumer can't help it -- but to read faster, yes. And you can't beat the money-saving in case the recession deepens. At the library, they're free. A guaranteed good deal in 2009.

