We the People were smart enough to write a Constitution and form a nation. Maybe someday we will understand the Wall Street bailout. 

Right now this new "supreme law of the land" remains terribly murky. 

Throwing enormous taxpayer assistance at a financial system that everybody thought was the soundest in the world is supposed to renew confidence. Funny thing, it induces a lack of confidence. 

Wall Street is being taken care of, it seems, but nobody else. Paranoid fantasies are even heard about America itself coming apart in the coming hard times. Has government of, by, and for the people grown so fragile? 

Every day's news out of Washington seems unpredictable and alarming. A supposedly self-correcting economic system is being prevented from functioning. That would be too hurtful!

Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke get up there to try to explain which way the bailout ball is bouncing today and are not convincing. How ironic that we have to take what these unelected leaders tell us -- on credit. 

The national debt? Tomorrow's worry. It's more urgent today to get banks lending again -- to an economy swamped in debt. And people spending again -- on the credit cards they've already overused. We are a consumer society now, not any longer a world-beating producer society. Solution: consume more! 

Taking their lead from the government's own hyper-promotion of home ownership as the "American dream," the nation's largest banks have used customers' money in such reckless, greedy ways, writing subprime mortgages then selling them off to complacent outside investors, as to discredit the MBA degrees of their top managers. What did they learn at grad school? 

Now these same brilliant folks need taxpayer sweeteners to lend again (although that's how they make their money, isn't it?). Bankers, it's said in tones of shock, won't even lend to each other overnight. So they forgo a night's interest. Why should the public care? 

It gets even stranger. While big banks won't lend, smaller banks will. So take your business to a smaller bank, the market seems to be saying. Larger banks would get the marketplace message soon enough.

Giant banks are "too big to fail," we're frankly told. ("Too big to lend," too, it seems.) The failures of the mighty would spread like forest fires. 

But if that's true, should banks be allowed to grow so big in the first place? What do we need a $2 trillion Citicorp for if when it slips, it slips so gigantically the taxpayers have to rescue it? Banks that aren't too big to fail should be easy to bring about. When they grow past $250 billion-odd in assets, let them split into smaller competing banks. 

President Eisenhower a half-century ago warned Americans against an over-powerful "military-industrial complex." President Bush ought to warn us against the "financial-political complex." That's what seems to be running the show now. And pretty sloppily, too.

