Of all places hurting in America, why is it that Las Vegas evokes the stingiest sympathy?

After decades of overbuilding, mortgages are defaulting. Homes are being lost in Nevada's largest city, and the urban winning streak in the desert looks to be over.

Certainly, we ought to be able to feel for the families. But in the case of Vegas the place, a little bit of "serves you right" enters in. A little bit of envy, too, most likely. 

While cities dependent on industries such as autos and steel have shrunk, Las Vegas has grown rich on a pastime, a weakness, a vice. Gambling. The city of 2-million-odd is a center of manufacturing -- of slot machines. Far and wide, it sells the hardware and the dream. Places such as Pittsburgh, it seems to promise, can have tourists and tax revenues, too. Grow your own backyard money tree! There's no way a casino would be coming to this city's North Shore without years of ethical softening-up and legislative lobbying by interests in Las Vegas. 

It can't be denied that controlled jackpots, big-name entertainment and ceaseless promotion have made a wonderland in southern Nevada, with its "Strip" of casino-hotels that glitter by night, dazzle by day and perform economically like exports.They bring in the "outside" money of travelers from around the world. 

But almost everywhere else, gambling makes local folks poorer. What the people who will ride buses and subways to the North Shore will throw into slot machines will drain away disposable income from competing entertainment and eateries -- which, under state law, will be under tighter restrictions on smoking. In Pennsylvania, what the casinos want, the casinos get. 

Las Vegas, however, that fabulous city built on the sure thing of "house" winnings, seems as clueless as anyplace else to the sudden change in luck in housing. 

A federal panel went there last week to visit the grass roots with respect to the $700 billion taxpayer bailout for financial institutions. How come it's not doing more already to kick-start new lending?

"Our economy has gone from the fastest growing in the nation to amongst the worst," the state's banking commissioner told the bipartisan traveling troupe. A Nevada congresswoman cited "no discernible impact" yet from the bailout. Strangely, in Pittsburgh, it's like lightning. PNC Financial Services Group is doing a rapid $5.5 billion acquisition of Cleveland's National City Corp.

A Nevada housing agency reported 600 calls a day from homeowners frantic to head off foreclosure. 

Bill Uffelman, president of the Nevada Bankers Association, offered what might be a clue. Less government aid to giant banks and more to small community banks, he said, would stir up more lending to would-be home buyers. "It seems to be a matter of too big to fail versus too small to matter," he said.

Now there, the Las Vegas view might be right on.

