Let's hope Chicago-based Tribune Co. is the iceberg and not just the tip of the iceberg.

Tribune filed for bankruptcy Monday, the owner of some of the country's best newspapers and worst baseball clubs. (Aw, that last is just for fun. The Chicago Cubs aren't that bad, they just never won a World Series in their first century and are now, like the Pirates, into their second.)

But the Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times, Baltimore Sun and until recently, Newsday -- those are all fine newspapers, although "mainstream" liberal in editorial viewpoint, which becomes forgivable under current business conditions that threaten right-thinkers as well as the predictably foggy.

The industry as a whole is hurting from a decline in big advertisers -- all those pages of "run-of-the-paper" department store and supermarket displays -- and the growth in Internet, blogs, television and other "competition for eyeballs," as investment leader Warren Buffett puts it. 

Tribune made a perfect storm of it all with a huge buyout of public shareholders last year. Real estate tycoon Sam Zell threw in employee ownership, too, but took on $13 billion of debt. The next big repayment, close to $600 million, isn't due until June, but the economy may still be in doldrums then. Meanwhile Tribune has opened its jewel box. Newsday was sold to Cablevision Systems Corp. for $650 million. The Cubs, Wrigley Field and a piece of a sports TV channel could be next. 

The Tribune Co. owns nearly 30 other television stations and newspapers. Media analyst Ken Doctor said Zell took on debt far out of proportion to cash flow. Hence his bid for reorganization may not foreshadow an industry trend.

What "Bertie" McCormick would think of this turn of events can only be guessed at. 

The late Col. Robert McCormick, scion of a great farm machinery and publishing clan, was master of the Tribune for decades. He made sure the masthead carried the debatable motto, "World's Greatest Newspaper." The related radio and TV station used the call letters WGN. 

The colonel came across, perhaps unjustly, as a stuffed shirt. Critics sniped at him with the nursery nickname "Bertie." He gave radio audiences a fine Saturday night music series (from "Chicagoland") but insisted on lecturing about Americanism in the intermissions. His pronunciation of George Washington's name was "Washton." 

A jauntier cousin, also militarily prouded, Joseph Medill Patterson, founded the sensational tabloid New York Daily News after World War I, and his daughter planted Newsday in the growing Long Island suburbs of New York. A sister, "Cissie" Patterson, put out the old Washington Times-Herald, the capital city's "bible" before the Post got so uppity.

Medills, Pattersons and McCormicks left big marks in the news business. Sam Zell -- well, let's hope the bankruptcy isn't what's best remembered. And emulated.

