You tend to wish that John F. Ferguson had got "a little more out of life." 

But after all who's to say? America could use his sort of peculiarities right now.

The country is in recession partly because we spend too much and save too little, individually and nationally. We're way in debt. 

Mr. Ferguson didn't have that problem, judging by reporter Paul Peirce's wonderful story in this newspaper last Sunday. 

A solitary bachelor of few words, the elderly farmer occupied 240 acres that his parents had owned before him in Indiana County. 

His habitation was a mobile home, his transportation a muddy pickup. Chickens ran around his yard amidst rusty farm equipment that he'd bought at flea markets and a broken-down school bus where he stored crates of papers and what-not. Years ago he had eked out a living driving school buses.

Regulars at a coffee shop in Blairsville would recognize him by the farmer's cap and bib overalls he habitually wore, both noticeably on the tattered side. He'd order a small black coffee, study the financial pages of newspapers, light a cigarette and chat with a woman he used to know, until she died a while back. He complained about the price of cigarettes. The lady said, "You'd never know he owned 50 gas wells."


But much more than 50 holes in the ground. 

When he died at age 71, in January 2007, farmer Ferguson left an estate valued at $2.6 million -- after taxes and expenses, $2.2 million. And all bequeathed to a small country church, where he had attended services with his mother before her death years before, but almost never since.

Which was why it was such a surprise to the 80 members of Hopewell United Methodist Church. First, that the man they hardly knew had left so much. Second, that he left it all to them for charitable purposes indefinitely, in effect forever. And only one limitation, "no bricks and mortar." He didn't want them needlessly building anything. 

So now at the white-walled church off Route 217 near Black Lick there's a new foundation in Mr. Ferguson's name. Pastor Jason L. McQueen says the estate's income should make possible $75,000 to $100,000 a year in good works, depending on securities markets, of course. 

Mr. Ferguson's assets, besides oil and gas wells, included stock in Alcoa (down lately, which he wouldn't have liked) and in banking, energy, health care and broadcasting.

What's so ironic now is that the U.S. economy is said to depend two-thirds on consumer spending and it's faltering. Politicians are into bailouts and "stimulus." We've got to free up more money, they say, for banks to lend and people to spend. 

Yet everybody knows that accumulation of capital is vital for the system's health, too. Not only for investment in tomorrow's tools but tomorrow's charity. Oh, let's admit that farmer Ferguson probably overdid it. Trouble is, too many of us underdo it.

While we are being bailed out, his thrift goes marching on.

