Americans are waking up this Christmas Day to a big package under the tree, bought on credit. The bailouts package. 

And more is to come in the way of economic "stimulus," also on credit. 

If they're all paid for someday, these could be proper gifts. But they do have to be paid for. 

We as a people have abused credit badly, individually and nationally. Can we get away with it one more time, in the trillions? 

Bailouts and stimulus are meant to keep the recession from sliding into depression. But they will not work long-term if they just feed the junkies' habit for consuming now, paying later or never.

Free market forces might apply the brakes faster with less damage, but the voters spoke on that in November. They handed the keys to politicians, experts, special interests and all-but-in-name socialists. 

But so far, not so bad. There's been no financial meltdown like the 1930s. A timidity to lend, yes, but no shortage of money. A $250 billion slug of taxpayers' capital has headed off bank failures. 

Another $17 billion gives the Big Three automakers a bridge around bankruptcy, where chaos might lie. Better to enter 2009 with General Motors, Ford and Chrysler chastened but still on their feet. 

What an instructive year it's been. Small investors are stung in their 401(k) and other retirement plans. They have to hang in there and believe in a comeback. 


Labor unions surely have learned that super-sweet benefits for workers (and retirees) put killing burdens on employers. Pampered and overpaid executives were fairly caught taking outrageous bonuses; that money train will slow down. And workers will try harder in '09. They want those jobs. 

Everybody is sick of seeing U.S. manufacturing erode. Hence President-elect Obama's trade negotiators have a golden opportunity. They must demand more equal two-way traffic with the low-wage countries. Especially China.


The Federal Reserve looks less infallible than in the past. It is adding like mad to money supply, to stimulate demand and head off deflation. But the longer-range danger is inflation, a dollar that becomes a joke. Can't allow that. We need people to start saving, especially the younger generation.. 

Mr. Obama and Congress are raring to go on public works spending as a job stimulus. They could shovel the national debt $1 trillion deeper in one year. But unlike the 1930s, when infrastructure got built for a pittance -- look at Boulder Dam, look at half the state parks of Pennsylvania! -- the law now calls for prevailing, that is virtually union, wages. So we won't build as much as we should. And if it's absurdly "green" spending, many a dollar may go to waste. 

But if it's all paid for, the slump of 2008 can bring an American "correction" in the best sense. As recovery takes hold, tax revenues will rise. And we can start paying down this crazy debt. 

