Imagine an airline putting its worst foot forward. Worst feet, make that. A whole crew of employees is involved. Would you publicize how they mess up?

But hold that answer. When a movie called "Happy Flight" comes to theaters, go see it. You'll enjoy the sort of jet travel you'd hope never to experience in reality.

The plot elements are familiar. A pilot on his first trans-Pacific flight. Engine trouble (did a mechanic misplace a tool? Flight attendants with too much to do in too little time. Panicky passengers. And an emergency landing - a storm. 

All this has made heroic, or crudely funny, movies before. Hollywood must be already casting last month's "landing" in New York's Hudson River.

"Happy Flight" is a corporate surprise, however. Companies just don't expose the soft underbelly of their industry like this. This is Murphy's Law with the landing gear up; everything that can go wrong in the sky will go wrong. (Picture Ford or Toyota doing commercials of cars skidding off roads. Or Merck or Kraft making entertainments of product recalls.) 

So a tip of the captain's cap to All Nippon Airways (ANA Group) Japan's second largest air carrier. Japan Airlines, JAL, is first, but both expect their fiscal years to end in the red March 31. ANA seems to be taking its recession with a brave smile.

A representative last week said the company not only loaned its hangars and jetliners to the filmed satire but cast members too. ANA workers filled the ticket lines and seats as "extras." They loved this project. Management must have, too. It is hosting guests at promotional screenings in U.S. cities. Pittsburgh's (at the Regent Square theater) was the third, behind New York and Los Angeles, although ANA doesn't land here; it has connections via US Airways and United. 

The movie's first minute looked baldly promotional. Then the truth dawned. It was all negative. Funny, yes, and after a while very suspenseful, but this is the very essence of fear of flying. 

How about the young pilot who freaks out on entering his first cloud bank? Not to mention the thump of a bird slamming the windshield. A jumpy new flight attendant spills air sickness pills all over the floor and ruins the special dessert for first class. A violent-tempered passenger bullies people into letting him carry on oversized luggage. Older, calmer crew members do prevail in minor crises. But trouble develops on a wing alongside a General Electric engine. Turn back to Tokyo or not? In a Pacific typhoon whipping towards Japan? 

The result is a fine commercial film that could, and probably does, double as a training film. And not only for airline workers but any workers. And bosses.

And here's the most unexpected effect of all. Instead of scaring away all thoughts of taking off from Mother Earth, "Happy Flight" inspires a yen to visit Japan. And by ANA. Take that, consumer psychology! 

