Economic suicide bombing.

What else can you call the launch of an utterly counterproductive war against Israel by Hamas terrorists in Gaza?

And to think, Gaza -- under its new mantle of rubble -- could be one of the world's most prosperous places. 

You'd think 25 miles of shore along the blue Mediterranean would suggest ... oh, tourism, for example. Surfing, sailing, boardwalks, restaurants. Within short flights to the wonders of Egypt and the Holy Land to boot. 

And sunlight, lots of that. Sufficient to grow vegetables and flowers for the tables of Europe. And to found schools for the development of technology and industries to advance solar energy, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, seawater desalination. 

Capital? No problem. Other Arab countries would lend and give. Europe, too. Even the United States. Even next-door Israel.

Add to this, freedom. Freedom from military occupation, at least. The last troops went away more than three years ago. Israel unilaterally pulled out its forces and settlers, uprooting 6,000-plus Jews to supposedly enable 1.5 million Gazans to create their own prosperity. Among the assets left behind were empty greenhouses and the experienced Arabs to run them.

But madness set in. Or maybe just economic indifference, inexplicable to the sensible mind. Mobs tore the greenhouses to pieces like a hateful, cursed thing. Customer relationships, markets and jobs? Gone. And this in a place of 35 percent (but it may be much more) unemployment.

Thus, with everything lined up for a new birth of prosperity -- land, labor, capital, climate and the good will of the world -- Gaza set to work, firing rockets into Israel. Screaming airborne bombs. To make the nearby parts of a neighboring country economically untenable as well. So war became inevitable Just like blame, against Israel. 

To contend that Gaza has enough land for prosperity may seem a stretch. 

With 1.5 million people in 139 square miles, the Strip is often sympathetically described as one of the world's "most densely populated areas." But it is nothing like as crowded as New York City, and Singapore has more than three times the population in twice the area, plus $49,000 per capita Gross Domestic Product to Gaza's pitiful $1,000 or less. Hong Kong's numbers are even more shaming.

Small places with brains and ambitions can make big economies. And Gaza, of course, if not in the control of murderous idiots, would be part of a bigger place, Palestine, by unity with the Jordan River's West Bank.

What did the rocket barrages into Israel accomplish? Nothing but predictable massive retaliation. Air strikes on the terrorist nests, cruelly established among civilian populations. Gone in blood, agony, grief and rage are hundreds, perhaps by now thousands, of noncombatants. Gone, too, in dust and rubble, is millions in property. And who knows how much economic opportunity. 

This is economic suicide bombing. The world should be very, very angry at it. Disgusted goes without saying.

