The first little touch of class turned up on Wall Street since the nation's financial center laid its trillion-dollar egg. Top officers of Goldman Sachs passed up their bonuses.

Nope, didn't quite earn it this year, the leaders of the leading investment banking house admitted. Although not in so many words. 

Still, it's an example to the United Auto Workers.

That might seem an impossible stretch to suggest. Top dogs at Goldman Sachs get $600,000 a year salaries, forget the bonuses. Assembly hands at General Motors, Ford and Chrysler toil for $73 an hour total labor costs. (Their take-home pay is far less.) It's like comparing kings and commoners.

But here's the connecting thread. Their belts must tighten anyway. 

Goldman's aristocracy made the noble gesture even as congressmen clamor to shut down the bonus-making mechanisms that typically generate two-thirds of a Wall Streeter's rewards. If banking needs a bailout, the taxpayers' can't have such a finger stuck in their eye. 

The same principle applies to helping Detroit. The Big Three automakers are losing catastrophically, their vehicle sales at a 17-year low, share prices nearly wiped out, and a public advance of $25 billion in low-cost loan guarantees might or might not make sense. But not -- not -- if the public, itself facing a recession squeeze, is dragooned into supporting a union contract with pay and benefits far above average. And that's sinking the companies. It's not a lease on life, just a stay of execution.

Bankruptcy -- which believe it or not has its passionate cheerleaders -- would let General Motors et al throw out the union contract. Out would go the managements too, probably. But the companies wouldn't "die." They'd come out from under billions in no longer tolerable costs. And could truly compete against the Toyota, Hyundai and BMW "transplants" that do make money making cars in America, just non-union. 

Could the words on the wall be clearer? Auto managements and union should come to Congress with truly lifesaving breakthroughs, without being forced to in bankruptcy. 

The Goldman Sachs executives' pre-emptive strike, in case you missed it, was announced last weekend by seven top brass. CEO Lloyd Blankfein's bonus last year was $70 million. This year the $600,000 salary is it. "It's the right thing to do," a spokesman said. "We are part of an industry that's directly associated with the ongoing economic distress." Banks and brokerages have cut almost 160,000 jobs this year, and Citicorp will pink-slip 53,000 more. 


A group of senators in southern right-to-work states that manufacture autos in foreign-owned plants said the industry clearly can thrive without a General Motors, Ford and Chrysler. 

They're wrong. Americans want a prospering Big Three. But don't take us for granted.

