Can this be the way economic freedom ends, by voting it out?

The election on Tuesday poses a very hard choice: Do Americans continue with a free market economy or go with socialism? 

Who would have thought we'd be voting on this? Wasn't it decided? Capitalism clearly "won." America produced the best life for the most people over the longest time. Centrally planned economies never did nearly as well. Communism failed. Wherever tried. 

"The end of history," a respected scholar felt entitled to name a book. Just let every country do as the United States does. Problem solved.

But have we unlearned our own lesson? Does prosperity, enjoyed for so long, subtly undermine a people's conscience? So that we forget how wealth is created. And think it can be made to grow by government-directed slices of the pie.


Old age insurance and welfare programs, for example, keep folks from serious deprivation but teach a bad lesson. That they don't have to save for themselves. They depend on the "entitlement." And it's their right, by golly. 

From this it's only a short step to see all economic benefits as a creation of government. Politicians love this. It's they who seem to bring you "good times." 

So while the country's road, bridge, school, sewer and prison systems deteriorate -- all basic responsibilities of government -- social welfare programs commit tens of trillions in future obligations. Which have to be met by higher taxes or cheaper money -- inflation. Business people, beware. 

But business is far from without sin. It lobbies shamelessly for the public's money via subsidy and tax break. It "partners" with politicians on pork barrel projects. It pays top executives like princes, although this tarnishes the notion of fairness in the minds of workers. Meanwhile, they are badly taught the country's history and the virtues of capitalism in the first place, in government-run schools. 

Among elite liberals the prosperity created by free enterprise isn't just taken for granted. It is despised. It wastes and pollutes. It can only be curbed by "green" technologies -- subsidized, of course, by the public.

But are Wall Street or the big banks any better? They take taxpayer bailouts against their own herd-like lending. On overpriced houses with underpriced mortgages! But who was it that made them do it? The government. The politicians. 

Communism couldn't do all this damage to us; we did it to ourselves.

Tuesday's election could bring more self-inflicted wounds: quick passage of the so-called Employee Free Choice Act (a power grab by labor bosses). And a new list of Constitution-flouting Supreme Court justices. And a gamble that 5 percent of high-earning Americans can be squeezed for enough taxes to share with everybody else, without crippling the economy.

If you vote for nothing else Tuesday, beware of further socializing an economy that under both parties has been brought to the brink.


