It was mainly a social occasion. An elegant black tie dinner in New York. A Supreme Court justice was the honored guest. 

But Clarence Thomas didn't predict, and nobody asked him to -- it would be awfully bad form -- if Wall Street's meltdown won't someday end up before the Supreme Court. 

Here we have the U.S. government fixing to be part owner in nine of the country's biggest banks. And bullying them to let the government in, whether they like it or not. Can this be constitutional? 

The gut says no. But the gut is a notoriously unreliable guide to the nation's founding document. And we're in a financial crisis. The election year fire alarm is clanging. 

But let's say you're not one of the nine but only the 50th or 200th largest bank. And the government does not buy into you; is that fair? Aren't Big Brother's banking "partners" the more likely to see business thrown their way? Future lawsuits for sure.

Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson didn't sound like a strict constructionist when marshaling the bank behemoths last week to accept $250 billion of taxpayer stakes, even if some could stand on their own. That's to remove the stigma from the neediest banks.

So much is psychological, see? We can't have this economic crisis dragging on. Banks can't lend -- or say they can't -- and the economy's wheels would grind even slower. So something's got to be done, even if it means turning We the People into silent banking partners under Article uh ... Article er ... well, some clause anyway.

But conservative Justice Thomas' mission at the dinner microphone the other night wasn't to prophesy, but rather to explain how he goes about judging. By relying, he said, on the only reliable "wall" between the Constitution and "making it up by personal opinion." That is, the "original intent" of the framers. 

Addressing the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, the court's only black justice -- and ironically the only one dissed by Democrat presidential candidate Barack Obama -- offered originalism as "a legitimate and impartial way to judge." To neutralize his own biases he said he often has his law clerks "reverse the parties" when arguing the merits of a case. "The law has a meaning independent of our desires," said Thomas, 60, author of "My Grandfather's Son," the 2007 memoir of his rise from poverty and limited horizons in rural, segregated Georgia. 

He lamented how the popular culture and even higher education de-emphasize the values of hard work and deferred gratification. "People feel strongly about rights with no conception of what they are," he said. 

One way to get America's promise right? Read the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, Justice Thomas said. They're "at least as easy to understand as a cell phone contract," he quipped.

