In advance of trick-or-treat night and in the midst of a spooky stock market let us consider something comforting. 

Candy. 

The United States now boasts the world's biggest candy maker, Mars Inc., based in Chicago, producer of Snickers bars, Three Musketeers and other products that do not require heaps of consumer confidence. Just a little old impulse buy works fine.

You can't buy stock in Mars Inc., no relation to the planet of the same name. 

The founder, Forrest Mars, decided long ago he didn't need non-family shareholders, analysts, rating agencies and financial regulators looking over his shoulder into the chocolate, caramel and peanut pots.

He raised what capital he needed privately and just kept selling enough nickel candy bars (back then, ah!) to keep reinvesting profits. Under children and grandchildren his firm forged ahead of Pennsylvania's Hershey, Switzerland's Nestle and most recently England's Cadbury.

Mars passed the British leader a few weeks ago -- ironically in this chaotic stock market -- by acquiring Chicago neighbor Wm. Wrigley Jr. Co. in a $23 billion deal. Combined, the firm has 29 percent of the U.S. and 14 percent of the world candy market, reputed to be a fairly recession-proof arena. "Bad times" tend to hurt big-ticket item sales, but people will treat themselves to a sweet even while worrying macroeconomically. Halloween trick-or-treaters in 2008 won't come home empty-bagged.

The Wrigley firm and family, no slouches as marketers, make Juicy Fruit chewing gum, Life Savers and Altoids, and in the course of 117 years owned the Chicago Cubs baseball team and the ivied stadium where they play. Wrigley men helped to pioneer the international trade that brought rubbery chicle to these shores from tropics halfway around the world and encouraged an oral habit that ... well, at least it didn't endanger the health like smoking. 

A long-lived singing commercial, "Double your pleasure, double your fun ..." lingers in memory lauding the company's Doublemint Gum.

Forrest Mars played the radio like a master. Just before the rise of television his "Dr. I.Q." toured the country, hired auditoriums (including Pittsburgh's Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall) for half-hour nationwide radio programs and quizzed members of the audience on bits of general information. 

"I have a lady in the balcony, Doctor," an assistant would introduce a volunteer in the crowd to a microphone. A correct answer brought applause and 11 or 17 or some such modest number of "silver dollars." The popularity of the show sold carloads of Milky Way bars, back in the era when Clark bars, Hardies Butter Scotch and Teaberry Gum were made in Pittsburgh but without such magical marketing. 

It's nice that if Wrigley had to go, it went to Mars Inc., and America is back on top of the sweets mountain.

