Learning goes on all the time in the business life of Constance I. Spearman. So does gratitude.

The company she started not quite nine years ago has crossed $1 million in annual billings and keeps developing offshoots. 

"I was kind of surprised to gross $1 million. It didn't seem like it, but that's where we were," she said. Gross, of course, is not profit, which is what's left after expenses, taxes, and in Spearman's case, prayer.

Originally a provider of household help to the disabled, her company now owns an assisted-living facility and recently launched a unit to send medical professionals to homes. A new idea, The Benefit Bank, will guide needy families to aid programs.

Spearman loves to mentor other new business owners and says outside advice has been gold to her.

"I made a lot of mistakes," she said in an interview at Home Healthcare Staffing & Services Inc., 8862 Frankstown Road. Her company occupies two storefront buildings handsomely remodeled from a vacant East Hills warehouse.

Two early mistakes, she said, were an accounting system that wasn't equal to the mazes of welfare billing and failure to consult with a lawyer. "You need it in writing," she says with a smile.

Nine different types of public payments, called "waivers," reimburse the firm at levels from $15 an hour for household chores to $21.68 for personal care. Spearman's central staff numbers about a dozen, but she employs about 100 in all, mostly part-timers. 

Expenses run tens of thousands a month, notably for payroll, liability insurance, taxes and workers compensation. And commercial-rate utilities have gone up twice within a year. "I have become a very sharp shopper," Spearman said. "I'm a negotiator and my accountant is very strict." Computerized operations are a must, and her son, Lamar Rice, 31, is in charge of her company's information technology. 

Spearman's bank, National City, introduced her to PowerLink and SCORE. The former, backed by the Heinz Endowments, assembled experts to critique her business plan and urged her to name a chief financial officer, which she has done. He is accountant Emmanuel Ike. SCORE is the Service Corps of Retired Executives. One of its volunteers, retired Shadyside insurance executive Harry Corbett, consults on a regular basis.

A perennial problem in taking care of the sick and elderly is labor turnover. "We're continuously interviewing," Spearman said. "Some people leave for better jobs and some burn out. It's not an easy field." She's proud of workers who have gone on to nurses training. One of her principles is: "Learn the job first myself, then teach it to employees." 

A Pittsburgh native now living in Trafford, Spearman, 50, remembers wanting to be in business for herself since at least her 20s. After seven years at Honeywell Corp. in Minneapolis, she returned home as a career adviser at the Triangle Tech school.

When her own mother became disabled, "it was so hard to find people who could take care of her," she recalls. "I thought with baby boomers coming into their old age, there was a need to fill." She first partnered in a senior care service, then launched Home Healthcare Staffing to serve all age groups. 

"The business just took off," she said, but found that a business plan of the sort that experts call for really was essential. "I had to stop and write down a lot of policies and procedures."

Other essentials seem to have been patience and faith. Her 15-bed assisted living facility, The Citadel at 6755 McPherson Blvd., Homewood, needed major wall and roof repairs and has taken three years to break even. 

The entrepreneur praises her bank - and God. At National City's East Liberty office, Vice President Carla Frost "has been good to women-owned businesses," says Spearman, "and I give a lot of credit to the Lord. I pray about things." She is studying to become a part-time Christian minister, with about two years to go on that track.

Her work week consists of five days, sometimes six, rarely seven. She tends to start early and end late at home or in the office with paperwork and phone calls "when it's quiet." But she says, "I love what I do and don't consider it a burden."

In Spearman's view, school systems ought to prepare students better for the practical world where people make a living.

"I wish young people would learn basic life skills," she said. "Maintaining a checking account. Not getting into credit card debt. Keeping your driver's license in good standing. If you've got a dollar, it doesn't mean you have to spend a dollar."

Her own allocation of a dollar, she said, is "the first 10 cents to the Lord, the next 10 to savings, and the other 80 cents to all the rest ... I try to teach it to people."

