The income tax is the worst thing the U.S. government does to its citizens. But it can't be all bad. It got rid of Tom Daschle.

One minute there he was, poised on tippy-toe for public service. He was to be confirmed as our first czar of socialized medicine, a humanitarian role he has itched to fill for years. Just in time he was found to have made a "mistake" on his income tax. Saving himself something like $100,000.

It could happen to anybody, of course. It's a trap for anyone who happens to have a "free" car and driver put at his disposal by a big business friend. That's income. As taxable as a wad of $100 bills.

Daschle never knew that. Or maybe forgot it. He's a busy man, even after the voters of South Dakota in 2004 retired him from the Senate, where he had been Democratic leader. How can anybody know every cussed detail of the tax code? It runs to thousands of pages. 

Daschle found his own mistake, which not many overt cheaters would. An outright crook wouldn't have earned $5.2 million making speeches, writing, and advising health care companies with business in Washington since leaving the Senate. 

The horrible truth hit him last summer. As a confidant of then candidate, now President Obama, he, Daschle, might be called to higher service piloting universal health care in the United States.

The appointment came to pass. The new president named the ex-senator secretary of Health and Human Services, and Daschle, having fessed up to his debt to the Internal Revenue Service months ago, figured that was that. Forgiven. Forgotten. Finis.

But ah, not in vicious Washington. Especially since the president made a point of excluding any lobbyists for key jobs in his administration. That, plus the fact that other high-profile appointees turned up all thumbs filling out their Form 1040s.

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's honest mistake was to miss paying self-employment tax (15.3 percent of gross income) as an outside contractor for the International Monetary Fund. But he scrupulously paid two years' worth when the error was pointed out.

Then another two years to clean himself up completely to face the Senate as Treasury secretary nominee. Most heart-warmingly, he pledged to be more careful now and deserves a chance. 

Nancy Killefer lost hers. Obama named her to the new job of chief performance officer of the government — top efficiency expert, in effect — and then it came out that a $946 tax lien was put on her house by the District in Columbia in 2005. For unpaid taxes on household help. She paid it, but too late. The best person for the job had to withdraw her nomination. 

And what does all this prove? That the income tax is a monster. Merciless. Trying to evade it ... uh, er, that is, making mistakes in its jungle of provisions, exceptions, exemptions and temptations can derail some of the best careers. But at that it's a pretty fair screening device, no?

