Why does the smell of fish linger over PNC Financial Group's cheapskate takeover of National City Corp.? 

For a bunch of reasons, but the first is that it does nothing to increase banking competition. It shrinks competition. 

Yes, some branches will be sold, but the $5.6 billion deal doesn't even bring in a big player from outside the region, like San Francisco's Wells Fargo. It just lets PNC, already Pittsburgh's biggest, get bigger. Its market share will top 50 percent when it absorbs Ohio's largest bank, with hundreds of branches on both sides of the border. The anti-trusters of yesteryear would explode. 

Then there's the wretched stock price that National City holders will get for their once-mighty institution, $2.23 a share. The stock has gone a bit higher in recent trading, perhaps on speculation of PNC coughing up more. Undoubtedly there's been outrage, including from Congress, which never thought it had voted for this. 

Should a lame duck U.S. Treasury, with $700 billion from taxpayers to unclog the nation's credit arteries, be engineering bank mergers? 

Such heavy-handed doings would seem to scare off a potential "white knight," a free enterprise maverick who'd figure that Ohio's biggest bank has got to be worth more than Big Brother chooses to price it. Remember the $2 first offered for Bear Stearns, the broken investment bank? The outcry forced J.P. Morgan Chase to eventually spring for $10. 

In truth National City should stay independent. Insured depositors weren't even making a "run" on its dwindling capital. And to deprive a place like Cleveland of its own hometown stable of financial decision makers? Imagine the outrage if it were Pittsburgh. The city on the lake will lose thousands of jobs and leadership positions, and we will not gain in proportion.

And after all, are gigantic banks such a great thing? The "Japanese miracle" couldn't survive the lending disasters of the trillion-yen banks of the 1990s. Smaller banks make smaller errors. Will PNC, soon to become the nation's fifth largest in terms of deposits, become "too big to fail?" Who needs that? Let them be careful and prosper.

National City also happens to harbor the ghosts of great Western Pennsylvania banks acquired over the years: Union National Bank of Pittsburgh, Integra, Equibank, First Seneca, Keystone and Pennbank. Thousands of stockholders of all of these may well have held on to National City stock all the way down to meltdown. A year and a half ago their punished paper was worth $37 a share.

National City's trust department has to be a prize, too, grown with the assets of generations of Pittsburghers, including Union National's McCune family, scions not only of a banking fortune but of an oil refining partner of John D. Rockefeller.


A great history goes down with National City. It shouldn't go at all, but certainly not cheaply. 

