Sadly, a transit strike around Dec. 1 begins to look possible. But this time, let it be different. 

Let the riding public stay strictly out of it. Union and management should fight it out with no help or hindrance from us. 

Oh, but a transit strike is "unthinkable," some say. It will kill the city! 

But this sort of alarmism only invites the politicians to come in and split the differences. That's no good anymore. 

The unaffordability of public employee union contracts has gone on for too long. Cities, school boards, and Port Authority Transit have got to put the brakes on the impossible pension and health care commitments they have been making for decades. 

A showdown not confronted now will only kick the same issues on into the future. Some day, the unsustainability has got to be faced.

Could business in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County survive a strike (or from the union view, a lockout) that drags on for a month, six months, a year? 

Here's a guess. Yes. 

And better now, in a general slowdown anyway, than later. 

PAT's commuters and shoppers will work out alternative rides. They will car pool and gather on corners where passing motorists will pick up as many as possible, people who'd normally not pick up a hitchhiker. Crisis brings out the best in people. 

Company vehicles would ferry some workers. In low-income neighborhoods, rides would be rounded up in SUVs, cabs and from good Samaritans. Jitneys would prosper. The elderly and handicapped would need special help, but can you imagine it not coming forth? 

PAT might save a little in its bleeding budget by laying off staff. And opening deserted busways to automobiles. 

A long strike would hurt Local 85, Amalgamated Transit Union, but its members enjoy the highest bus driver incomes in the country relative to living costs. Their pensions and health care beat the heck out of private enterprise. They retire as young as 55. The average rider doesn't have it nearly so good. 

PAT clearly can't fund the contracts it signed in the past to keep labor peace. That appeasement came at a deadly price. In common with municipalities and school boards that agreed to unsustainable costs, PAT lost riders. Just as Pittsburgh, this livable city, has lost population. The growth is gone. 

PAT itself could die in a strike. Free enterprise might then cherry-pick for profitable scraps of transit service here and there. But this assumes private capital, which always has other opportunities, would take on a very hassled public responsibility.

Transit workers might compound their wage losses in a strike by losing the big employer altogether. It's happened to other unions that opted for employment suicide over taking a "step back." 

An irresistible force meeting an immovable object? It does seem that way. But let them go at each other. While the riders find other ways to get where they're going until it's over.

