It was Thanksgiving Day, but no one at the table was talking thankfully.

"I curse the day I started my 401(k) plan, although with pre-tax dollars," said Dad. "Forty percent of its value is down the drain since summer. There goes a carefree retirement!"

"And what about our house?" moaned Mom as she motioned her son to finish his candied sweet potatoes. "The house over our heads is worth less than last year, maybe even less than we still owe on the mortgage, can you beat that?"

"At least you two got out of school in good times," Bro addressed his baby boomer parents, "with no student debt hanging over your heads and there were jobs galore. But look at Sis and me. Unemployment is 6.5 percent and heading up. My dream of making millions in Wall Street - forget it!"

"If only," said Sis, "I hadn't maxed out all the credit cards the banks mailed to me when I graduated from high school totally unfitted to read fine print. Now they won't even lend to businesses. How am I going to get a perm without a credit card? Or a new pair of jeans with holes in them?"

Just then the door opened and a stranger entered. Everyone instinctively recognized the Holiday Visitor. They made a place for him and Mom piled his plate high, murmuring something about "plenty of food."

"On the other hand," Dad suddenly, mysteriously realized, "my 401(k) will come back eventually. Mutual fund shares in good companies always do. And if I have to wait a bit longer to retire, I can handle it. I don't know what I'd do with the time anyway. Lousy golfer."

"And don't get me wrong," Mom said, "I love the house and the neighborhood. Eventually it will be worth more than we paid, if we keep up the mortgage payments. Which we can by cutting out non-essentials. No more lottery tickets for me! And this was my last cigarette." She stubbed it out with determination.

"Heck," said Bro, "I'm really cut out better for a mechanic or oil-driller, coal miner or construction laborer anyway. There's lots going on in the energy field."

"I'd still rather be in the U.S.A. than anywhere," Sis said, "with a new president coming in and the war ending. I'll waitress till I can pay for college and get a job teaching or nursing."

"Mark my words," said Dad. "They'll bring taxes down to pep up the economy. And instead of bailing out the Big Three, let consumers like us bail 'em out! I can't wait to buy American again. Manufacturing in this country isn't done by a long shot. Not to mention millions of jobs rebuilding roads, bridges, dams and sewers." 

"Hear hear, dear!" Mom said. "But why are you smiling, stranger, and where are you off to before the pumpkin pie?"

The Holiday Visitor turned at the door. "Other tables need me more this Day, dear lady. Some folks haven't yet seen how good things are."
