It's never a shock to see a shoppers' revolt in an inflationary market.

Higher education is such a market. Learned as they are, the professors and deans and trustees can't seem to hold down budgets.

Tuitions keep going up and today's young people typically come out loaded with student debt. A big chunk of early-career income has to go to checks and payment stubs in the mail. Or else parents skimp on their own retirement saving to help pay the kids' way across the high barrier to the land of sunny salaries.

Not only tuition but textbooks bend the students' backs. Is there any excuse for a schoolbook that costs $100 or more as some do? And that is also hard to sell at a fair price, used, thanks to frequent, dubious revisions. 

Not to mention that students also have to pay to eat and sleep somewhere while training for four and nowadays often five years, too. For future doctors and lawyers the meter runs longer, of course.

Funny thing, the usual response to all this youth abuse -- which society abets by accepting the myth that every kid has to go to college -- is to help the victims pay. Never to admonish the perpetrators to ease up already. Cut costs, you faculty people! Give the next generation a break. But politicians never take that side. Their interest is to take credit for feeding the beast with more scholarships, more loans.

So students have to take cost-cutting in their own hands, a rational market response.

One way, a growing way, is to save some fare at least halfway up Inflation Avenue by attending a two-year community college, then transferring. 

No radical idea this. It's been around from the birth of community -- that is, taxpayer-funded -- colleges in thousands of counties across the land. But more young people see the economies in it. Community college enrollments grew 10 percent the first six years of this century, while college tuitions ballooned on average $4,000.

A recent news report has enrollments this fall gaining over 3 percent at the CCs of Allegheny and nearby counties, with more graduates transferring to the University of Pittsburgh at year three. "I feel I'm getting the same quality of education," said a 19-year-old at CCAC's North Side campus, because some of the same people teaching in his classrooms work at Pitt and Carnegie Mellon, too. Big difference: the tuition. Four years at Pitt averages $51,000; two years at CCAC, $5,300.

Conventional wisdom holds that an Ivy League education pricelessly opens doors in law firms, banks, and across corporate America. It's ironic that some managers who've had to be bailed out in Wall Street have sterling diplomas. But what if personnel offices of the future were impressed as much by community college credentials? Sign of a job applicant with the sense to save money, right?

