The real estate market isn't pain-free when you own a 26,000-square-foot house. You may have to cut millions off the price when you want to sell the darn thing ... uh, er, that is, the beautiful and tasteful although perhaps a bit too large thing.

Twenty-six thousand square feet, just to picture it, is 10 times the size of a fairly capacious three- or four-bedroom job. Family happiness has actually been experienced in 26 hundred square feet. 

But 26,000! There are manufacturing plants not that size. It is 260-by-100 feet of total floor, or about half a football field. 

Yet some of the very rich nowadays do seem to require extraordinary area residentially. Every man's home is his castle, the saying goes; at extreme levels, some take it literally. 

Which doesn't mean they're ready to stay put all their lives. And when they sell, by thunder, they expect to make a profit, like other homeowners There's an exit strategy even to the American dream. Trouble is, the end of the housing bubble is even starting to cause seller's heartburn at the high end, according to Bloomberg News. 

Kelly Porter, a 45-year-old California venture capitalist, is typical. He has cut the asking price on his 26,000-aquare-foot place by $7 million. It's on 7.5 acres in Silicon Valley, has a Venetian-style ballroom, and need you even ask if there's a wine cellar and swimming pool? "It's worth every bit of $45 million," Porter said. But that was the asking price last spring. Now it's $38 million.

Donald Trump, the real estate tycoon, sold his Palm Beach, Fla., estate for $95 million in July, but it was originally listed at $125 million. True, Trump paid $41.35 million for the place in 2004, but hey, he renovated. So did Porter, by "tens of millions," the latter said. 

That's another thing about homeowners in this class. They buy these fabulous properties and they're never up to snuff. They've got to be gutted if not indeed razed and re-castled from the foundations up. Armies of craftsmen are employed, so it's a positive economic factor in California, Florida, New York and Connecticut, the super-house states of America. But all are feeling price softness in the listings now. 

U.S. home sales across all price ranges sagged to a 10-year low in the second quarter. Median prices were off 7.6 percent. In Manhattan's luxury apartment market, current sales are down 25 percent from a year ago, a reflection of Wall Street's job cutting, it's said. On the other coast, a 10,340-square-foot house gorgeously sited in San Francisco's Pacific Heights, with the blue bay in the distance, sold at 17 percent below last year's asking price. Just $14.8 million. 

Is anybody losing money at this stratospherically high end? Real estate experts doubt it. The sellers are only probably taking less profit than they expected. 

But that hurts, when you live in a palace. And if you yell and scream about it, no one hears. There's all that space.

