It is considered bad form in a lifeboat to criticize the men pulling the oars. Whew, let them bring us to shore. 

What is another trillion dollars or two where life is at stake? 

Let the bailout of Wall Street (always remembering that it's really about Main Street, see?) proceed. 

Hasn't the entire United States' "real economy" been headed for who knows what awful rocks? The whole world's economy! 


And all because, when you come right down to it, a surplus of houses was sold. 

Who would have thought it? A few million families lacking proper credit got put into overpriced houses. And for such an economic sin as this, trillions of dollars in damage was done. It has shaken all the continents and rippled across the oceans like a tsunami. Nobody even is sure how of the full extent of the damage obscured by incomprehensible paperwork. It will take months and years to untangle it all. 

Did you notice that Iceland almost got sunk? You think our stock market got hit bad. The one in the small North Atlantic nation plunged 77 percent. How did poor Iceland get into it? European prime ministers stopped everything else and rushed to gather as if for Olympics fireworks. 

One thing is clear. Americans gotta be more careful what we sell. Watch it, home builders especially! 

The economy is so global now. Bankers -- at least those who work for the biggest, most inter-connected lending institutions -- all fall for the same kinds of bad debt and fad debt at the same time. This cannot be stupidity. Big banks are staffed at the highest levels with persons of advanced degrees from the finest universities. They can be quite snobbish about it.

Yet their flaw works just as well as stupidity, and regulatory authorities must get to the bottom of it. 

Herd lending generates chaos that leaves no advanced economy in the world untrampled. Fears of "another 1930s" are conjured up. Jobs and retirement security seem to hang in the balance. And limitations to freedom are accepted, even welcomed.

What else is it but freedom throwing up its hands when governments not only move mountains of taxpayer funds to take over the debts of giant banks but buy into their equity as well? Become part-owners. At least till the lending paralysis ends. And then somehow divest the ownership.

We're told capitalism is the best, yet when free commercial lending falters and comes to a stop (although, strangely, not at the small bank level), government steps in until the market place behaves again. Then steps out. Somehow this pattern is not reassuring. Not to mention that our $10 trillion national debt, twice the size of only five years ago, grows by more trillions with scary speed.

But the lifeboat is headed to shore, and the passengers shivering under blankets and huddled close for warmth, are grateful. For now.

