It is a relief to turn from the frantic world of Wall Street to what soothes the soul. Art. 

For example, the dead body of a 7-foot, 9-inch tiger shark floating in a tank of formaldehyde. This may not look like art until you think about it (or even after you think about it). 

At Sotheby's auction house in London last Monday the object cited here sold for $17.2 million.

Absurd? But so was Wall Street's Lehman Brothers going bankrupt after 158 years of sophisticated financial deals only to slip on the national banana peel of mortgages for people who couldn't afford houses. If the stock market's Dow Jones average can fall by 504 and 449 points on two trading days in one week, it is not illogical that a work of art should fetch $17.2 million.

However, in the case of the pickled shark, how do we know it's art and not just garbage? 

The title doesn't help much: "The Kingdom." But it was created by -- that is, not necessarily caught but stuck in a tank and exhibited as more than just a dead fish by -- Damien Hirst.

Never heard of him? He's England's wealthiest artist. And not even dead yet, as most old masters usually have had to be before the big money appreciated them. 

Sotheby's two-day sale of Hirst works netted $199 million. Which smashed to little pieces a 15-year auction record for a single artist's work. A 1993 clearance of 88 Picassos, once considered fabulous, brought in just $20 million. 

So not even counting inflation, Hirst's grisly displays of animal mortality must say something to today's collectors. The very evening that Sotheby's got rid of his shark, his "Golden Calf" went under the gavel for even more, $18.5 million. True, that work was beautified with gilded horns and hooves; nevertheless, it's an embalmed calf.

None of this is considered a travesty in today's art world. The theme that Sotheby's placed on its auction of 223 Hirst works -- the fellow's sheer output puts a Michelangelo to shame -- was "Beautiful Inside My Head Forever." 

A London art dealer could hardly contain what was inside his head: an expectation that other contemporary works will price upward. "The sale was magnificent, a triumph," Bloomberg News quoted Ivor Braka, hailing the courage of art buyers to go long "at a time when other markets are reeling." 

The shark and the calf were bought by anonymous collectors. No way of knowing their plans to display these treasures. Loaded tank and all, "The Kingdom" has got to top a ton. Someday, it no doubt will go to a museum or some hapless younger heir. ("No, please, Uncle John, could you just leave me the $17.2 million instead?")

But if you think the subprime mortgage mess should have been headed off before it led to Wall Street disaster, what do you suppose will be the future of today's Anti-art? To be displayed in galleries 200 and 300 years from now? Or trucked away to landfills? Damien Hirst won't mind. He took his profits.

