Seven score and five years after Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves, 40,000 to 50,000 still toil in the United States. And about 27 million in the world. 

"The largest pool of potential slaves in history" is an unintended consequence of the population explosion, Kevin Bales told a University of Pittsburgh audience. 

Of the world's 6.7 billion people, 1 billion-odd scrape by on less than $1 a day. These are ripe victims, Bales said. They can be made to work under force, to earn nothing beyond bare subsistence and to escape never. Yes, it's a "crime against humanity," solemnly so declared by a dozen United Nations conventions. But it can only be rooted out by governments, companies and customers who won't stand for it.

Americans can't be sure of never patronizing the output of slaves, Bales said. Not if we use shoes, steel, cotton, coffee, chocolate, sugar, shrimp or mobile phones. 

Certainly, not all the above are tainted. In fact, only a small percentage. That's why it doesn't do to "place guilt on the whole supply chain," said Bales, a London professor, author and co-founder of the nonprofit movement Free The Slaves.

"The big challenge is traceability," he said. "Let's find and stop the slaveholder farm." Industrywide boycotts hurt "the 98 percent of legal farms" in cocoa or coffee production, he said. 

Of the current U.S. slave population, Bales estimated half is in prostitution. Domestic service and agriculture are second- and third-place abusers. He said people are still "sold" in Haiti; average price $100. Young children in Ghana are trained to go underwater with weighed feet to untangle shrimping nets. Whole families have been rescued from hooking "Persian" rugs in India, which leads the world in slave population, up to 20 million, despite law after pious law against it. 

Fellow anti-slavery author Ben Skinner said China is the largest commercializer of prison labor, including millions of "prisoners of conscience." World trade negotiators at the highest level rarely bring that up. But lots of made-in-China merchandise "can't be made that cheap without slavery," Ken Bales said flatly. He quipped that Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is "getting better" at listening on this issue.

Bales and Skinner spoke at a conference sponsored by Pitt's Global Studies Program and International Business Center on the irony of mankind's oldest personnel policy -- slavery -- surviving into the global economy. But it could be eradicated in 25 years, they said. 

Slavery's input into steelmaking is by way of remote Brazilian forest camps where natives produce charcoal for blast furnaces. However, Brazil has been "pretty good" of late, stamping out 5,000 to 6,000 slave jobs a year. The South American country also keeps a "dirty list" of business offenders. "We should do that," Bales said.

