It's unbecoming of the Brookings Institution to get all hysterical about global warming.

Brookings is left wing, but prestigious left wing, loaded with smart people. If Democrats win a veto-proof Congress on Nov. 4, they'll no doubt look to Brookings for the brainpower to back lots of liberal policy.

So it's weird to find this elegant Washington think tank dealing in doomsdays. 

Such as: "Manhattan and Florida would be under water ... Nevada would have no water at all." Plus fiercer hurricanes and desert farmlands. All this unless Americans straighten out, fast! 

Only "7 Years to Climate Midnight," said the headline of a newspaper column co-authored not by a tree-hugger but the president of the Brookings Institution, the top man, Strobe Talbott, a former deputy secretary of state in the Clinton administration.

This eminent man gives us only until about 2015. 

Americans must lead the way in the next seven years, he says, to cut carbon emissions -- from power plants, cars and anything that burns coal, oil or gas -- or the game of civilization itself might be over. Too late to say we're sorry then. 

By mid-century the world would be on a "trajectory" toward 4.5-degree warmer average temperatures. Melting polar ice would raise the seas, Talbott doesn't say by how much, but one United Nations estimate is 3 feet. 

Seems like a fallacy there, though. En route to 4.5 degrees hotter by 2050, Earth would warm 1 degree first, then 2 degrees. Before the seas rise 3 feet, they'd rise 3 inches. Even conservatives would notice. They'd stand right up with liberals in a crash program to stop it. You could bet on technical breakthroughs.

In fact, a slow motion crash program already is under way, thanks to a parallel passion -- energy independence. 

Americans are in process of swearing off undue amounts of imported oil. Taxpayers are throwing big bucks at alternative energies and automobiles, "clean" coal, and reborn nuclear plants. Texas oilman Boone Pickens is promoting windmills up and down the Great Plains. The Associated Press counts $500 billion in tax breaks and subsidies for renewable energies awaiting Congress' loving hand by year's end.

But from the left, Brookings warns that 100 fossil-fueled power plants are in the works, giving us that last seven-year chance. Only hope: a heavier role for government. It favors "cap-and-trade" buying and selling of carbon credits as incentives for polluters to clean up. Wall Street and both presidential candidates like that approach, too. 

Not enough, though. Brookings proposes a new layer of corporate reporting: public disclosures of annual carbon-dioxide outputs. As if business doesn't have enough forms to fill out. 

And what if manmade global warming proves a myth, after all? Just another trick of Mother Nature, sunspots, and long geological cycles of freeze and melt. Don't tell that to Brookings. It knows and it's scared.

