One bad thing about days like Monday and Wednesday. People take away the wrong lessons. 

"That stock market!" some say. "You can never trust it. Not another dime from me!"

It's an understandable reaction, but self-hurt. Share prices in time will come back. It always has happened and will again. Worth the wait, provided you're not "on margin," using borrowed money to stay in there. 

For most holders of IRAs (Individual Retirement Accounts) and 401(k) employee retirement programs, the bear market, while scary, has made pieces of ownership in good companies cheaper. On average they're 20-plus percent off their peak prices. 

So it's no time to abandon the steady salting away of a nest egg, as with payroll deductions for a 401(k) plan. 

Nor is it time for the country as a whole to turn sour on the instruments of private enterprise to create long-term security for the "little guy." Sure, demagogues will holler: "See, it's dangerous to give working people more for their Social Security taxes by way of personal investment accounts. The stock market can fall!" 

A silly newspaper headline greeted Monday's 504-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average like this: "Investors are back where they started 8 years ago." After yesterday's 449-point drop, the fallen DJIA at 10,609 was nearing its 10,588 level at George W. Bush's 2001 presidential inauguration. Implication: Nobody's gotten ahead under that guy. 

But this ignores all income from dividends since 2001. Plus the advantage of having something to fall back on vs. having none. It also assumes the shareholder sits rigidly on all 30 stocks in the Dow Jones list (almost nobody does), never takes a profit or cleans out a loser. 

Conceivably, of course, the market averages could fall even farther, but that wouldn't argue against holding onto shares that will prosper in the upswing. 

One bitter conclusion is definitely justified by this week's market crash. We thought those guys were smart! Some of Wall Street's most eminent and scandalously high-paid investment bankers went way overboard stupidity-wise. 

They stuffed the country's recent housing boom with bad mortgage junk food to buyers who couldn't come close to affording true market interest payments. And then packaged the bad paper for resale to bond buyers around the world, including banks and pension funds. Hence the credit crunch that threatens the wider economy. 

They broke a fundamental rule of financial common sense: Don't put too many eggs in one basket. Imagine Lehman Brothers bankrupt! And Merrill Lynch having to be sold off to a bank! Geniuses, right?

But ordinary investors, not nearly so smart, just a lot smarter, won't be spooked away from owning good stocks. Not for very long anyway.

