Just think, there's a part of the Wall Street bailout everybody could understand. If it gets enacted. Which isn't a total cinch.

That's the part that would limit the pay of CEOs (chief executive officers) at companies that need taxpayers to help empty the water buckets.

If We the People must save Wall Street from itself, then the top guys in the lifeboat can't expect to go first-class on salaries, bonuses, and perks. 

Various skippers did a mediocre job by definition. Or their companies wouldn't be floundering. But retribution may not happen this time. The speed of the rescue is so essential, we're told, in such scare-words as "crisis," "meltdown," "worst since the 1930s Depression," that we don't want to clutter up the legislation.

By the time the $700 billion bailout goes through, Americans may be so sold on the urgency of Wall Street's and Washington's distress, that it may not be possible to unlock the credit markets' alleged death-grip on loans and restrain CEO greed in the same waning session of Congress. 

The top rungs of the corporate ladder have never paid shabbily. 

But a generation ago, the white-collar-in-chief took home 30 or 40 times what the average guy on the factory floor got. Now it's well over 300 times. Managers aim to be billionaires. Reuters reports that CEOs of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 index last year averaged $10.5 million total compensation. And the majority of those firms made real things, not just financial deals.

Rank-and-file workers get understandably cynical at the two-tiered system, especially when jobs are lost and plants closed. So upper level greed is short-sighted personnel practice, too. Just bad psychologically. It's not good for capitalism. 

What an opening, though, Wall Street's and Washington's mischief of recent years has given the critics. Millions of unqualified home buyers got trapped in unsustainable financing, cheered along by lobbies for homebuilders, construction products, and real estate firms. It took a lot of lungs to blow air into the housing bubble behind the Crash of 2008. 

But if taxpayers must now lend to the lenders to end what's become a global credit crisis, they aren't going to give golden parachutes for the perpetrators.. 

Sure, it's dangerous to allow Congress control another facet of the private sector -- the pay at the top -- but a financial system that needs public aid is just asking for it. 

Everybody's wary of the "moral hazard" in enlisting taxpayers as the lenders of last resort. But if that means the end of good paydays for you, Mr. Executive, here's a guess that far more prudent lending is going to result. 

We may end up grateful for the woes in Wall Street. A learning experience has been needed. 


