All you'd have to remember is plugging in the car at night -- to have a full "tank" in the morning. A battery charged with electricity, in this new age. 

The average commute to and from work, say 20 miles each way, could be driven electrically. And without a trace of exhaust in the air. Or noise pollution either.

This was General Motors the other day making some good old-fashioned industrial news, a flash from the "real" economy. Where companies still make things, far from Wall Street. 

The world's biggest automaker -- if it can keep holding off Toyota -- announced a $370 million investment at Flint, Mich., to increase its output of four-cylinder engines for small cars. 

Four cylinders sounds like something to burn gasoline. But the compact 1.4-liter engines are for fallback power in GM's forthcoming Chevrolet Volt and Cruze cars. 

The vehicles will recharge at electric outlets at home or in parking garages, and they'll run on the stored wattage of their batteries. And switch after 40 miles or so to the gasoline engine. 

An incredible amount of fuel might be saved if motorists en masse choose to become pluggers. True, more central power plants would be needed. And overnight charging wouldn't be pennies. A car isn't a light bulb. 


GM's CEO Rick Wagoner is betting he's got a winner. He needs one. His company's U.S. vehicle sales are down 18 percent from a year ago, and 2008 isn't getting any easier, as the bailout fever in Wall Street indicates. 

After billions in multi-year losses General Motors shares, once the bluest of blue chips -- they topped $94 a share at one point in the past two decades -- have flirted with $10 of late. The company's product line veered way over to gas-guzzling trucks and large sport-utility vehicles, which were popular enough a few years back, but the road ahead now looks filled with smaller cars and SUVs. 

A major research priority is an engine that can run on less of, or something besides, gasoline. Detroit's Big Three are lobbying for $25 billion in federal subsidies to research new ways to achieve breakthrough technologies beyond the reach of their own purses. 

GM has invested $2 billion of its own in "powertrain projects" the past two years, is targeting a 100 percent increase in small engines by 2011. 

The new plant will be cavernous at 552,000 square feet but will involve just 300 jobs. So figure far over $1 million investment per job. That's automation. It's why auto plants will never employ the armies of blue-collars that streamed in an out in the glory days.

Remember the Michael Moore movie of some years back, lambasting General Motors for shutting down so much production at Flint? At least the 1.4-liter engine looks like a viable market.

GM's new Cruze car will go into production at Lordstown, Ohio, in two years. The Chevrolet Volt is still in development but Wagoner means to have it on sale in November 2010. Will we "buy American" again by then?

