It comes as a shock -- but a gentle, nostalgic shock -- to find that western Pennsylvania had a communist community once. Well, "communal" at least, so let's use the less fighting word.

The Harmonist Society, fundamentalist Christian in origin, pre-dated Karl Marx's violent slant on economics by decades. The celibacy-practicing immigrants and converts of Old Economy Village, Beaver County - only 1,000 at peak head-count - could hardly have been more peaceful. 

Like other early American experiments in fair shares for all -- Massachusetts' Brook Farm of intellectuals was famous -- they didn't leave a lasting economic model. But they did leave what is probably this region's sweetest visitor attraction.

Step into the garden at Old Economy and your first thought is -- heaven. These flowers, these trees, this peace! And on Labor Day Sunday at least, a gentle young lady across the lawn offered cookies and lemonade. Why aren't more people here, you wonder? And yet crowds might spoil it.

Highway traffic? It's only a murmur from State Route 65, the extension of Ohio River Boulevard, 20 miles downstream of Pittsburgh. The world just seems to pause for a century or two. 

Old brick buildings, cobbled paths, and a blacksmith's forge? Sure. But also a demonstration of thread-spinning from the cocoons of silkworms. The Ohio Valley produced silk! Also furniture. Farm tools. Cotton and woolen clothing. And crops and animals from 3,000 acres that eventually became Ambridge. Old Economy was a profitable, diversified, but doomed 1820s economy. 

Today the 3,000 acres are down to six acres. But they're the best six, operated by the state's Historical and Museum Commission with a lot of local volunteer help. 

A retired lady in a long gown played an antique piano as a soprano with the lightest of German accents sang songs that you never hear anymore in a "feast hall." It was upstairs from a small museum that might be the second oldest in America. The first Harmonists immigrated as religious dissenters from Germany. It took a century for industrial America, and capitalism, to finally pass them by.

Adult admission to this door into the past is $7. Except Mondays and holidays, the grounds are open March through December. A lot of school groups tour, as they should, but the nostalgia nerve grows tenderer with age. Imagine having a piece of Henry Ford's matchless Greenfield Village right in this area. An "Entrefest" on Sept. 27 will feature volunteers in period costume preparing for winter Harmonist-style.

Old Economy can't be exactly be called an unsung attraction. Area residents must know it's here. Yet how easy to let time go by without visiting. This year there's a coincidental reminder. The presidential election will talk about re-slicing the economic pie. Again. That doesn't go out of style.

