Two cheers for the neighborhood agreement that will bring a supermarket to Pittsburgh's Hill District. 
One cheer is for the store-to-be itself. The Hill's 17,000 people have needed modern food checkouts for decades. 

The second cheer is for the coming economies: competitive prices, but also savings in time, travel and trouble. Hill residents, predominantly black, have had to shop too far too long from their own kitchens. Fewer weary ladies will be lugging plastic bags on buses. 

But hold the third cheer. Because an investment that ought to be a straight-up business proposition now needs "neighborhood agreement." What for? A needed new store will serve customers. Why does the neighborhood -- in fact, of course, its activists -- have to agree? 

The theory is that this business is too crucial to be left to ordinary business motives. It must attract other businesses. But you have to wonder. A market opportunity as obvious as a food store surely needn't depend on a public show of hands. 

Is this a new requirement for free enterprises? Bring capital, hire workers, take risks, but also convince "neighbors," who might live 20 blocks away, to say it's OK. What if it's not OK until you jump through this or that hoop to please the right parties? 

Many business people wouldn't want to face that. They'd say, "I'll locate somewhere else. Less hassle." 

What an irony then, if the Hill's new food store, thanks to all this approval process, a year in the making, discourages natural development. 

Unavoidably, neighborhood agreement bears a likeness to central planning. It's not the free market model. Folks without their own money at risk decide what enterprises shall be and not be; their "leadership" picks the winners and losers. Entire nations have grown poor that way. Is street-level socialism any likelier to succeed? 

This is no knock to the people of the Hill. They have bad examples. So many investment decisions are made nowadays by favor of the powers that be. The governor goes around the state handing out public checks to "create jobs." 

Even the Hill's supermarket is larded in advance with subsidy. The coming North Side slot machine casino, which ironically will make low-income folks its likeliest losers, will throw off money to a subsidized hockey arena and $2 million for the supermarket, with budget sweeteners to Hill civic interests. 

OK, let the food market prosper -- which it will, and would have all these years, if crime is controlled. 

But then let the neighborhood put the red tape away and allow new businesses to come in freely as they see opportunity. Within hours of the activists' and politicians' back-slapping, a supermarket operator angrily claimed the agreement "specs" were rigged in favor of a competitor. Ordinary capitalism would sort it all out better. 


