The market works. And as it works it hurts. Some economic sectors take an awful beating from fuel costs. Airlines, for instance, with those big tanks in the wings, can hardly make a dollar anymore. It's almost certain that some won't last. 
U.S. auto companies, too, the once proud "Big Three" -- their shares in the stock market appear to discount a once unthinkable possibility -- bankruptcy. 

But there are upsides, too, to the pain around the gas pumps. 

Every other kind of fuel or technology that conceivably could make a car go is being aggressively researched, creating jobs. Including, literally, grass -- for ethanol. And coal, if it can feasibly be made clean and liquid. And wind, to generate electricity for cars plugged in at their garages overnight. Deep sea and deep rock oil and natural gas, and nuclear, solar and hydrogen energies have come awake to the alarm bell of $140 a barrel oil, even though the crazy price hasn't held there. 

We're driving less. And even killing less. Don't knock it as a market effect. There are many economic, as well as human, benefits to less slaughter by automobile. 

U.S. highway deaths last year dropped 4 percent to "only" 41,059, the lowest since 1994. Our rate of fatally smashing into each other was the lowest since such records first were kept in 1975. Statistically, 1.37 lives were prematurely snuffed out per 100 million vehicle-miles driven. 

When the Transportation Department issued those somber numbers last week, it credited safer vehicles and aggressive law enforcement. In other words, government on the job, hooray. 

But market forces clearly figured. As the economy began braking in 2007, and gasoline topped $2 a gallon, then $3, motorists cut back some mileage. The $4 shock didn't strike until a few months ago and has since abated, but for how long? Less total driving in 2008 does seem a certainty. 

Yet it would be a shame if this most beautiful and spacious America couldn't be afforded from behind the wheel of an American car anymore, especially in the good old summertime. 

Isn't it practically a national birthright to get to the Grand Canyon sometime? And to Yellowstone, Yosemite, Florida, the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, the purple mountain majesties and fruited plains -- and pre-eminently by car? 

No wonder China and India are becoming voracious gasoline users and major auto markets. It's the most convenient and private way to go, the closest to the ground between the humblest neighborhood and the grandest scenery. Bicycling and walking have points, no doubt, to those long of wind and short of distance to a destination. 

But let's hope we never cease to be a nation of car drivers. Of people who like to look 'em over at auto shows and park them in the shade for a wash and a sweep-out. 

On the other hand, less killing and maiming by automobile is definitely a trend to be encouraged. May we see 2008 keeping it up. 

