Let's not count on the economics of foolish behavior. Washington's "stimulus" won't do America any long-term good if it relies on people doing dumb things.

Yes, the country is in recession and the bottom's not yet in sight. It is only natural that prudent folks will put something away against times getting worse. They'll reduce credit card debt and put off purchases that can be put off. The dream vacation can wait till better times. That is sensible, and it is what millions of people are thinking and doing. 

The Obama administration's $800 billion stimulus grab-bag conversely is beamed at boosting spending — by families, companies and all levels of government itself, never mind how deep already in deficit.

This stimulus is what economists call a "demand-side" program. Just give households $500 or $1,000 in tax cuts, they'll invigorate the economy by buying goods off counters. Just spend, that'll do it. Even if the goods are foreign-made and the money borrowed from future generations. Or "printed," the sly, silky Federal Reserve way.

Intuitively we know this must be wrong. 

A country of spendthrifts, where 70 percent of the economy is dependent on consumers, we're incessantly told, a country that saves nothing, produces less than it eats up, has to come to grief. As indeed America has. Job losses are more than 2 million. The stock market is down 40-odd percent. Trillions of dollars of value has leaked from retirement plans and institutional endowments.

Yet, we'll come out it by more borrowing from the Chinese or printing more money, never mind future inflation? It doesn't pass the confidence test. The more we tinker, the less the self-healing mechanisms of the marketplace get a chance. 

Still, the stimulus isn't all foolishness. Tax cuts make sense. They leave more money in people's and companies' hands to spend, save or invest as they see advantageous. Lower prices on houses, for instance, stir up new buyers. Equipment spending and leaner payrolls will bring U.S. manufacturers out of recession stronger than before. This is "demand-side" stimulus. It generated the Reagan era of prosperity.

The right kind of government spending for infrastructure — roads, bridges, water and sewer systems — also makes sense. At any time, you've got to have maintenance; we've neglected it. So for an extra jolt of job creation in "bad times," why not?

In fact, this recession already has gone a long way toward the "correction" it ought to bring. People are saving more — 2.9 percent of after-tax income, up from less than 1 percent. Entitlements are viewed, correctly, as a financial monster that must be attacked. There's a healthier suspicion about politicians' ability to run an economy (with a sentimental exception, still, for the new president). Mysterious new financial paper — "subprime" mortgages, "credit default swaps" — cries out for regulation.

A lot has been learned. And America, even under our chilled feet, could be slowly moving forward again. Let's not stop it with lame economics.

