So Volkswagen is returning, but not to Western Pennsylvania. That was a lesson learned. 
Twenty years after it blew a perfectly sound strategy to make cars in the United States, Germany's biggest automaker will try again with a new U.S. assembly plant. Once a pioneer, however, it's coming back a tail-ender. And this time, its 2,000 jobs and $1 billion of investment will go to Chattanooga, Tenn. 

Tennessee is a "right-to-work" state, one of 22 in the United States that give workers the choice to join -- or not to join -- the dominant labor union on the premises. Unions are weak in such places, but job growth is strong. 

Nearly all the Asian and German "transplants" making cars in the United States are in right-to-work states. America's gasping "Big Three," in contrast, all unionized -- General Motors, Ford and Chrysler -- are losing market share and rapidly turning blue. None has a common stock worth $14 anymore. GM last week warned of thousands more job cuts coming. 

Detroit vented that grim news even as Wolfsburg, Volkswagen's German headquarters, said it will start building 150,000 midsized sedans a year in the United States, beginning 2011. 

Trying to compete here with imports alone, VW has only a 2 percent U.S. market share vs. 9.8 percent globally and loses money in America. 

The sagging dollar is the ironic hero in CEO Martin Winterdom's strategy to reverse all that. Dropping like a stone against the euro, the dollar makes made-in-America cheap, but painfully inflates the stickers of vehicles from Europe. 

Chattanooga will include body-stamping, painting and assembly operations. It will in short chew up the raw materials, employ the many skills, and generate the "multipliers" that make host communities salivate and subsidize. Volkswagen said it looked at 25 locations; whether Pennsylvania was on the list wasn't clear. Bloomberg News said the Tennessee city's infrastructure of transportation and services, supplier base and work force won the day. 

In its first foray into U.S. manufacturing, in 1972, far ahead of the Japanese, Volkwagen took over a never-activated factory shell from the old Chrysler Corp. near New Stanton, Westmoreland County. The Germans were used to unionization. They thought to insure positive labor relations by openly inviting the United Auto Workers in. 

Friendly gesture, bad result. A series of wildcat strikes marred the startup years, a few "troublemakers" were fired, and while labor peace eventually took hold, other foreign carmakers got the message. No other "transplant" ever came to this state which had led the way. 

The Westmoreland-built Rabbit autos in time lost favor and management responded to the market too woodenly. VW called it quits in 1988 and later sold the plant to Japan's Sony for television making. No union ever again got in the door. 

Volkswagen still makes Beetle and Jetta autos in Mexico, but Pennsylvania had no more shots at the industry it scared away. 

