There is something about $4 gasoline that looks as if it's not going away. It serves purposes. 
First, by catching everyone's attention. It is making us conserve, in small ways as consumers, big ways as businesses. 

It is creating jobs and inventions. Research labs keep trying to build a better battery. And to coax more kilowatts from the sun and wind. Under North Dakota, in hard rock formations that may hold more oil than all of Araby, drillers grind down two miles -- then sideways. Young men are told to go west again. And north, anywhere there is oil. 

The country is rediscovering trains; they drink less diesel. The automobile is being revolutionized. So too, perhaps, are labor relations. How can unions ask for the sky if fuel costs are killing companies? Look at the airlines. 

Global warming orthodoxy tells us to burn less fuel; well, $4 gas is powerful preaching. Politicians heap abuse on oilmen for greed and windfall profits; but secretly, you have to suspect, they are glad to have the particularly American illusion of cheap energy shattered. There will be fluctuations at the gas pump, but cheap is over. 

That's causing painful shifts for many consumers and businesses, but it's the clearest signal that this country must produce more oil -- in this country. And natural gas, coal, nuclear and all the others. Put an end to this absurd timidity at building refineries. Overwhelming imports of oil are what is disastrously cheapening the dollar. 

The good news is that all forms of energy are here, if we let them come to market. In fact, if we want to fight recession, we should be saying to the energy industries, not your profits are obscene, but go spend and invest them. This is the legitimately "green" frontier where new technologies should be growing along with steel, machinery and engineering sales. And don't forget, jobs. 

Not to be cheered, certainly, is how $4 gasoline raises prices for food and other retail goods dependent on transport. High energy costs certainly will shift patterns of consumption. How much less will we spend on other goods and services to pay more at the pump and the light switch? Heavens, people may waste less on the lottery and slot machines! But also on travel and vacations. Elderly folks in their own homes, who may indeed be "house poor" due to taxes and maintenance, may finally be driven out by utility bills. 

Here's another likelihood. We'll quit chasing phony energy solutions. Corn ethanol that does little for the environment or "energy independence" deserves nixing. A public serious about energy supply wouldn't subsidize millionaires to grow food to burn. 

Just watch: $4 gasoline might do a lot of good. 

