If you can't hit a fastball or smash through 270-pound tacklers in helmets, face masks and pads, you may still hope for the big career rewards. There is Wall Street. 
Wall Street, even in a bad season. Maybe especially in a bad season. Some very big teams are desperate to get back in the win column. 

Just ask Thomas Montag, 51, financial superstar. 

If he shows up for work Aug. 4 -- and who can doubt that it would take a very bad cold to keep him home -- a $39 million signing bonus is his for becoming head of trading and sales at Merrill Lynch & Co., which has been nothing but an embarrassment at trading and sales of late. 

The country's third largest securities company took a net loss of $4.65 billion in its second quarter, its fourth three-month period in the red in a row. And those are billions with a "b," as in the bullishness long hailed in Merrill Lynch ads. 

Montag has $50 million in stock options for switching to team Merrill from team Goldman Sachs Group Inc. His 22-year career with Goldman included a two-year stint that tripled the company's profits in Japan. His new options replace those he forfeited at Goldman, where he used to be a colleague of John Thain, now CEO of Merrill. 

Montag's up-front rewards, like those of the executive class generally, doubtless rankle the rank-and-file workers whose belts tighten most painfully in bad seasons. Yet the top brass pay train keeps running. Just the other day two U.S. senators sounded off that if Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac, the stumbling government-sponsored mortgage giants, need a taxpayer bailout, their executives should wear a tight new cap -- on bonuses. 

Since early 2007, Merrill Lynch has taken $41 billion of write-downs heavily related to subprime mortgages. Onetime chairman Stan O'Neal and his lieutenants are gone, generously "parachuted." And since Thain came aboard last December, two dozen senior traders and managers have cleaned out their desks. 

The 94-year-old company's shares are down 30-odd percent even since Montag's hiring was announced in late April. He will get an annual salary of only $600,000, barely subsistence by Wall Street standards, where the big payoffs are bonuses, an average $16 million or so last year among the moguls of "the Street." 

Montag, reputedly a very smart, athletic leader, astonished Goldman associates by celebrating his 50th birthday with a powerful show of willpower. He dieted away 50 pounds. He's been a big giver to his and his parents' schools. A $1.4 million gift to his alma mater, Stanford, was for a state-of-the-art scoreboard. He has a second home on Hawaii's Big Island, but his first, according to the New York Observer, is a six-story townhouse in Manhattan's Upper East Side. List price: $38 million. Can it fail to be called the House a Merrill Lynch Bonus Bought? 


