Being a union auto worker means never having to say you're sorry.

The Volkswagen factory in Westmoreland County shut down 20 years ago, and it was all management's fault. That is good labor mythology, and it will be good enough for some ex-VW workers the rest of their lives.

And yet foreign-owned "transplants" are flourishing in the United States without any United Auto Workers to deal with. But America's "Big Three," General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, are bleeding billions under the pension and health care burdens of their union contracts. Let's hope they won't be the Busted Three. 

Volkswagen itself is immigrating anew with a $1 billion plant set for Chattanooga, Tenn., a "right to work" state where the UAW has a snowball's chance of organizing. 

This pattern of lessons learned and unlearned emerged from a fascinating postmortem that marked the 20th anniversary of VW's pullout from this commonwealth of high taxes, quick-to-walk labor, corrupt government, and bad business climate.

The consensus of ex-VW workers interviewed was to blame management. Those rigid Germans, don't you know. They misjudged U.S. car buyers and stuck with the boxy Rabbit model too long; Americans don't appreciate engineering. Funny, though, isn't it, that surveys show us favoring foreign cars, specifically for "quality?" 

Only one VW veteran confessed that a rash of wildcat walkouts and grievances in the Westmoreland plant's first critical year left him with "a bad taste for unions." 

The lesson missed by his buddies, that management of a new enterprise needs gung-ho spirit on the plant floor instead of labor hassles, was picked up all too well by the Asian and German transplants that followed Volkswagen to these shores. Not one invited the UAW in. Neither did their workers. 

VW's own successor at the idled Westmoreland plant, television maker Sony, also competes in the global battle without unions tying a hand behind its back. 

Employees who couldn't bring themselves to be "company men" at VW had to go to other, lower-paying jobs. If they found them. There was plenty of hardship. And Volkswagen's manufacturing on this continent went to Mexico. Pennsylvania may never get another auto plant. 

Tennessee's lesson learned doesn't exactly deserve an A either. Blessed with a positive labor climate, it is nevertheless gifting VW $500 million in tax breaks and subsidies. Other states dangled other incentives. 

This is so wrong. It distorts markets. Taxpayers shouldn't buy jobs, companies shouldn't let themselves be bought. Only politicians win a racket like that. They can strut around claiming to "create jobs" with your money. Meanwhile, our Big Three -- and their union workers -- get a little more black and blue as the capital costs of a foreign competitor are discounted. Is that any way to run a state?
