Have you noticed? Gasoline is under $4 a gallon again. 
This wasn't supposed to happen. The "story" of the year is bad, and bad it must stay until the presidential election. After that, a new leaf in the national happiness may be turned. 

A driver who reads, watches and listens to too much news couldn't quite believe the numbers over a service station the other day and filled up with $3.88 gasoline. 

Of course it might not last. And it's still too much. But the doomsday trend is broken, the trend of up, up, up and nevermore down in the price of America's basic constitutional fuel. 

Weren't we recently scolded that $4 gasoline and $140 a barrel oil are here to stay (if indeed the barrel's not headed to $200)? And that we must abandon our wasteful trucks and SUVs and switch to fancy-priced imported hybrids? Or else carpool or take the bus. And cut out all other discretionary spending. 

Yet somehow global oil prices fell, and strangely fast, to $118 a barrel. Maybe they'll go lower too, but who'd be crazy enough to predict? 

Here's a guess that what pricked the oil bubble is that the United States now seems certain to drill for the stuff again in spots that have been environmentally off-limits, well out to sea from Florida and California and in a patch of wilderness Alaska. 

President Bush has been saying it all along and being ignored. But the people back home are letting Congress know that environmental sentimentality is sweet but $4 gasoline is serious. It hurts. 

Republican presidential candidate John McCain seems to smell an issue he can win on -- drill, drill, drill! -- if he'd only get dramatic about it. And even Democrat Barack Obama has begun subtly retreating from know-nothingism on the oil issue. 

Liberals who revere skimpy solar and wind power contend that drilling for even big oil quantities is futility. The resource is still finite, they say, and 10 years would go by before any "find" 50 miles from U.S. beaches produces enough supply to actually mitigate the $4 gallon. 

But the street price is under $4 now. And why? Because America is signalling a serious intent to increase domestic supply. No more slavishness to the likes of OPEC, Venezuela, and Nigeria. Market-makers the world over get the message. Oil is another tree that's not going to grow to the sky. Fight the price by hyping the U.S. supply. 

Wouldn't it be an ironic legacy of our outgoing, unbeloved president if intolerably costly gasoline unleashed the next economic boom? Namely, in all forms of energy. 

You want a way out of the "recession" the news media insist is upon us? Here it is, the stuff of jobs, sales, profits and help for our depressed dollar and out-of-whack federal budget and balance of payments. Which party will take that case into the election? They'll deserve to be the winners. 

