Farmers will talk. Ask a farmer about his problems today and he'll surely mention two. The cost of fuel and the cost of feed. Both are too high. 
"You can't get it back in the selling price of milk," a farm wife said in the cow barn at the Washington County Fair the other day. She wasn't complaining, just saying it like it is. 

Gasoline and diesel fuel inflation has struck farmers like a sudden hailstorm in 2008. Compounding the squeeze, corn to nourish the milking herds has gone up to satisfy this country's huge -- in fact, downright unreasonable -- appetite for ethanol. The dubious gasoline substitute someday will be refined from grass, everybody hopes, but right now it mainly subsidizes politically-connected big farmers in the Corn Belt, not the small-acreage folks of Washington and other counties around Pittsburgh. They're all having county fairs at this season, and it's an education for city folks, also known as consumers. 

One thing learned is that lots of farmers are hobbyists now. As a business it doesn't pay. Or pays so little a fellow needs a day job. 

A visitor to the week-long fair outside "little Washington" (adult admission $9) struck up conversations with three farm families and all three had outside sources of income. One man seated alongside a pen of snoozing hogs was a computer programmer for a utility. A sheep-shearer was a foreman in an industrial plant. 

A guy trimming the hooves of a goat also brings in dollars from outside work, said his blue-jeaned wife, who was born on a farm, knows they won't get rich at it, but wants the children to have the same priceless growing-up. 

Life among stables, chickens, tractors and manure is too easily idealized, of course. But a message of the county fairs is that the family farm is indispensable to America, even if farm subsidies seem like just one more budget-busting way that Washington, D.C., goes wrong to buy votes. 

The way children grow up on farms is probably romanticized, too. But some of these country kids! Can't help being impressed as they guide their prize porkers to a sawdust arena before tiers of audience. With a cane in hand, each boy or girl nudges into the ring a clean, pink-skinned pig that far outweighs them. A livestock judge looks the oinkers over this way and that, and finds subtle distinctions of shoulder, hind quarters, and even personality. What a smile lights up the 12-year-old whose pet wins the blue! 

Horses, cows, lambs, goats and chickens compete on other days. No lions or tigers, but who needs the wild ones when the tame grow increasingly unfamiliar as the suburbs sprawl? Needlecraft, art work, flower arrangements and homemade pies- 

vie for other ribbons indoors. 

Get the kids to a county fair before it's too late in '08. This may be the family farm's best -- hopefully not its last -- stand. 


