What if President Obama's greatest success with the economy should prove to be not in his economic program at all?

He did not mention it in the inaugural address and may not mention it again.

He and his family are just living it: married parents and their children. 

They are demonstrating to young black people how to live and to prosper. By example. How to have children who know how to behave in school and therefore learn better. Children less likely to get in trouble and stay poor.

Where did the idea come from that it is okay to have fatherless children? Prison cells are filled with young men who grow up with those two strikes against them. Some 70 percent of black babies are born nowadays to single mothers. 

It certainly was not that way among African-Americans of older generations. In humble occupations and with scant opportunities black men nevertheless made steady marriages and reliable fathers. 

Some say it's the welfare state that caused that pattern to break up. There's also less censure nowadays against having babies out of wedlock. The "single mom" has become a cultural darling. The social damage of this misplaced sentimentality is all too visible in many slums. The economic damage is harder to pinpoint. 

Themselves inadequately educated, young mothers with children to tend, unaided, can't earn wages or pay taxes up to their potential. The children, lacking a father at home to help, often are not "school ready," able to behave, to learn, and to let other kids learn. Public education that once did a great job deteriorates but grows costlier and more bureaucratic. And millions of kids become ironically segregated, removed to private or home-schooling. It costs their parents at least twice what it should.

Follow out the economic ripple effects and the total burden on Gross Domestic Product has to be immense. It's not just an African-American problem, of course, but is most visible and most destructive in predominantly black urban neighborhoods. Once-great cities like Detroit, Cleveland and Baltimore go into decline despite crushing budgets and ever more "development" spending.

The new president didn't mention any of this in his inaugural address. But he has mentioned it before, last Father's Day while still a candidate. He urged young black males to marry the girls bearing their children and to become involved, everyday fathers.

In fact, he got slapped down for this by Jesse Jackson. To a certain type of "civil rights leader," black troubles have only one cause: white racism. Mr. Obama has not raised the common sense of it again. 

But he and his family are living it. And if taken as role models by African-American young people, they can re-invigorate black family, the quality of urban life, schools, property values and GDP. Without a word said. Or a $1 trillion spent. 

