Only 7.6 miles long. A single street -- and our whole economy unfolds along it. 
There is no "Milepost Zero." The street begins at an unsigned corner in Turtle Creek. The electrical equipment works that George Westinghouse planted looms alongside, a crowd of factories and office buildings that fill a valley. Think 25,000 jobs in the glory days. And 15,000 even into the 1970s, turning out nuclear power generators until America turned chicken on nuclear power. Now it's an industrial "park." All small companies. With obvious vacancies for lots, lots more. 

The pathway of history moves on. It becomes briefly a highway, rising out of East Pittsburgh and curving to the right. And it finds spread out toward the Monongahela the Edgar Thomson plant that Carnegie himself founded in 1875. Who says steel is gone? "E.T." is producing from blast furnaces, basic oxygen and continuous casting shops, and 1,000 workers. And have you caught U.S. Steel's stock price lately? 

Then the street turns grim, almost haunted. It becomes the main stem of Braddock, a mill town struck by everything the past half-century could throw at it. Suburbanization. Rapid racial change. Iron grates bar empty storefronts. Carnegie's preserved 1889 library a block uphill beyond vacant lots is a rare spot of hope. As is Braddock General Hospital (now UPMC like so many). 

The street seems to come up for air, bridging the old Pennsylvania Railroad main line, now Norfolk Southern's busy with coal and containers. Rankin's homes and churches are skirted on the left; then Swissvale's terraced single-families and a school converted to apartments. Then we twist leftward, dive under the rail line -- this is Pittsburgh topography, remember -- and pass the old Union Switch plant site, for years now a shopping center. 

Up a long rise is Regent Square and suddenly, retail vitality. A movie theater, art gallery, fashion and coffee houses, sidewalk tables -- people! 

An angle of Frick Park is passed, the best sort of urban greenery: cars go around, not through. There are trees in flower, tennis courts, kiddies' swings, Little League, women's softball. 

Then blocks of fine homes, Shady Side Academy's junior school atop a lawn, and an architectural gem in reddish stone, Park Place School. 

Across Penn Avenue now: big, blocky warehouses where Mine Safety Appliances Co. originated. Then comes Homewood, hammered by rapid population shifts and, in 1968, calamitous riots. Some empty lots never have refilled. Yet Homewood looks like a survivor. And finally, as undramatically as it began, the street ends, amid gardens and houses on the edge of Brushton. 

And the name of this paved and sidewalked timeline of history, probably an Indian path once, along which the triumphs and heartbreaks of Pittsburgh's economic life might be traced? Braddock Avenue 


