Until a few days ago, PNC Bank seemed to have much to thank the Bush administration for. The Republican gang that couldn't shoot straight economically gave the Pittsburgh financial giant a window to grow bigger -- fast. 

But apparently weaker fast, too. 

PNC got all green lights from Washington to acquire National City Corp. of Cleveland, cheap. Here was Pennsylvania's largest bank devouring Ohio's largest and anti-trusters saying nothing. Bush's Treasury Department even put up $5.5 billion of taxpayer bailout funds to make it happen.

But en route to becoming the country's fifth-largest bank, PNC may have swallowed a sack of cement. Its stock sank like a stone Tuesday. The closing $22 per share was down 41.4 percent on the day. And down 75 percent from its 52-week high, a penny shy of $88. It did rebound somewhat the next day and closed the panicky week Friday at $30.27 a share.

But what a fall. Chairman Jim Rohr's management crew at Fifth Avenue and Wood Street hadn't shipped much water in the industry's flood of mortgage losses. What made them leap aboard the shipwreck of National City?

"PNC has been one of the best banks. Unfortunately, it acquired one of the worst," said a Standard & Poor's analyst amid the wailing in Wall Street on Inauguration Day, an ironic counterpoint to the cheering in Washington. 

True, virtually all the nation's bank stocks tanked that day. But PNC's nose-over was steep indeed. The $85 billion financial powerhouse had seemed leak-proof. S&P analyst Erik Oja even rated PNC a "buy." Now, he's lowered it to "hold." 

Some experts believe the whole wallowing banking industry needs $250 billion more in bailouts. 

One thing Washington will not bankroll is rescues like PNC's of National City anymore, according to Lawrence Summers. President Barack Obama's top economic adviser says the second half of the $700 billion Bush banking bailout -- the part not spent yet -- has got to go to credit easing, not empire-building. 

"What's not going to happen," he said on last Sunday's CBS "Face the Nation" is for the funds that should support increased lending to consumers and businesses "to be used to finance acquisitions that may serve a bank but don't serve the country." 

Summers didn't name names, either PNC's or Wells Fargo's. The latter acquired Wachovia Bank in an even bigger competition-killer that got through the window as the Bush era ended. 

Even as Summers spoke, Wells and Wacho were accentuating positives in TV commercials during the Steelers game. Customers now will have two great teams of bankers serving them, they said. PNC will spin it the same way. But National City's "rescue" shuts down the last big bank headquarters in Cleveland and thousands of jobs. 

National City's once-respectable stock got swapped for a pittance in PNC shares. And now those have plunged. A bitter season this for holders of bank stock, typically a conservative lot, too.

