Freedom Day, it's sometimes called. 

"Cost of Government Day" is what Americans for Tax Reform calls it. 

Either way, bands don't play and politicians take no bows for sure. It's an observance without pride or pleasure, nothing like the Inauguration Day that so recently opened the age of President Obama. 

A good question is where the new president will put Freedom Day on the 2009 calendar. In 2008 it fell, shockingly, on July 16. 

It took Americans until then, midway through the year's seventh month, to stop having taxes to pay and regulations to pay for. 

All our income until then went for costs imposed by federal, state and local governments. Only on July 17 did Big Brother let us work for ourselves, so to speak. To buy a car, food or clothing, go to a movie or a restaurant.

Statistically speaking, of course. Nobody lives this way. We wouldn't stand for it. 

But it's a demonstration of what taskmasters our several levels of government are. That is, if every cent of income tax, sales tax, cigarette and gasoline tax, payroll tax, property tax and who knows what other tax, plus compliance costs for thousands of regulations, were front-loaded to the early part of the year.

The early part can't hold it all anymore. Government's share slops into the second half. 

This is another way of saying that our courts, prisons, wars, schools, highways, legislatures, parks, water and sewer systems, food stamps, farm subsidies, trash pickups, payrolls, pensions and boondoggles take more than half of all the citizenry's productive effort.

Ironic, isn't it, that Americans are slandered as spendthrifts. But we buy ice cream and SUVs only after paying the societal tariffs. 

Grover Norquist calls Cost of Government Day a "grim reminder" that government takes too darn much taxpayer money. He is president of Americans for Tax Reform, which each year computes the "day," hoping against hope to retard it. 

An alarming trend is that not only federal spending has jumped the tracks, but state and local too. They now account for a third of all government spending.

And this is before the coming explosion of entitlement spending. As baby boomers retire, they'll want Medicare, prescription drug coverage and other promised benefits.

Heartland Institute statistician Peter Ferrara notes that for the past 50 years, federal spending has taken about 20 percent of Gross Domestic Product, more or less. There's no way that level can hold. The politicians already have promised more. In 30 years, unless checked, government's share of GDP will be 40 percent, later 50 percent. 

Heading that off has to be one of the new president's priorities. Or the children and grandchildren won't enjoy Freedom Day until after Labor Day. Maybe Halloween. Some trick, some treat.

