The uneasy feeling grows that we are being hustled. 

It's a recession, yes. But who set off the fire bell that another 1930s is in the making? And that the new president and Congress have to get everything they want - fast - or things will grow irretrievably worse? This is how we get government by hustle. 

In fact, a government-directed economic recovery just may not be the best way to go. 

It will spend vast amounts of public money and public credit and invite a terrible future inflation. And it may not work as well as leaving free markets for a natural, though slow convalescence. Capitalism brought America to the top -- let's not trade it in.

Yet we keep being hit on the head by politicians and the media that "stimulus" is so much needed. The new president coming to office as an agent of change strangely looks like an agent of continuation. He would top this year's revolting $1.2 trillion federal budget deficit with another $1 trillion or so next year. And perhaps for years after. 

His major instruments will be huge expenditures for infrastructure and tax cuts. Public works will let the government spend -- tax cuts will let individuals and businesses spend. And there's some merit on both sides.

The country undeniably has roads, bridges, parks, water and sewer systems in bad shape. A down business cycle is a good time to fix them. But projects typically don't end recessions. They didn't in the 1930s. They do give orders to lobbying construction unions and companies, which are not then pressed to reduce costs or improve efficiency. Instead they're subsidized. We the People won't get any "bargains" from this infrastructure spending. No more Hoover Dams for a mere $175 million, as in the 1930s. We'll pay top dollar. 

Moreover we will be bailing out states and cities that have neglected their own infrastructure. Instead of taking care of streets and services, politicians have loaded budgets with fat pay, pensions and health care for public unions and themselves. They're worse than the Big Three auto companies.

Longer-term, the president-elect promises to tackle entitlement reform, and everyone has to wish him well with that monster and its vast constituencies. 

We naturally shy from the pain of recessions. But bad times are literally "corrections" of economic faults and excesses. By delaying house foreclosures, for example - except those that banks would do for good borrowers as a matter of business anyway - prices are kept from falling to where they'd draw crowds of new buyers.

It's not uncompassionate to prefer taking our medicine and getting it over with to the politically-directed rescue armada soon to get sailing. The country has been needing a serious correction after decades of living beyond our productivity. Going in debt by trillions more won't help. 

