The owner of a good restaurant in the centre of London recently told me that business was booming. Since his establishment is far from cheap, I expressed surprise. "Oh, it's quite simple" he said. "The collapse of the pound has led to an invasion of European tourists. Last night an Irish lady asked me whether the bill was correct because it seemed so low."

This would seem to fit with the anecdotal reports that many of those bargain hunters in Oxford Street on Boxing Day were also tourists. At all events, I do not think one should be misled by the post-Christmas shopping frenzy into thinking that the economic prospects are not as bleak as most people have already concluded. The evidence of statistics and forecasts is compelling.

One of the reasons for the collapse of the pound is that it was unsustainably high for too long. Just as house prices and personal debt could not go on rising indefinitely at previous rates, so the pound could not remain at such a high and uncompetitive level. Yet those of us who long ago argued for intervention to ease the pound down gently to more competitive levels were ignored. This is because economic policymakers, just as much as the financial markets, tend to be in the grip of fashion; intervention in the exchange markets is deeply unfashionable in western industrial countries, although not in East Asia since the financial crisis of 1997.

Financial markets tend to overreact (shall I say that again?) and they may be overreacting against the pound now. The huge devaluation has come as a shock, not least to British people living in France and Spain on sterling pensions. But the devaluation has become an integral part of the government's broader strategy for economic recovery via a rebalancing of the emphasis of policy towards encouraging exports, discouraging imports and accepting that our future does not lie entirely in the growth of financial services. 

A modern industrial sector must play a vital part in the economy of any nation our size. The historian David Kynaston has long been suspicious of the shenanigans of the modern City, comparing its power, and the obeisance paid to it until recently by governments, to the overbearing behaviour of certain trade unions in the 1960s and 1970s.

Now, although a large devaluation of the pound was necessary at some stage, it is unfortunate that it should have come so abruptly, and that some policymakers have been a little too enthusiastic about it in their public comments. It is that sort of thing that can turn a desirable adjustment into a rout.

The founder members of the eurozone were so concerned about the gyrations of the exchange markets in the 1970s, after the break-up of the Bretton Woods "fixed but adjustable" exchange rate system that they constructed the Exchange Rate Mechanism, from which the single currency evolved. But they have only managed to eliminate gyrations of rates among themselves. The strength of the euro against the pound and the dollar has been causing increasing concern among Continental industrialists and businessmen.

The natural interest in the banking crisis, the recession and the danger of depression has for obvious reasons dominated the news recently. But in due course I think policymakers should re-examine the case, not for a return to fixed exchange rates, but for "target zones" within which the major currencies can float, with a presumption of official action to steady things when the markets overreact. And if you want evidence of overreaction, just consider the gyrations of the dollar, the euro, the yen and the pound over the past two years. 

Now, I do not wish to intrude on private grief when we are all wishing one another a happy new year, but I seem to recall that a whole industry of economists once assured us that all would be milk and honey once inflation was removed from the system, and that exchange rates would reflect "market fundamentals". What exchange rates in fact reflect is the fundamental desire of markets to speculate.

Yes, in the land of milk and honey, people's "expectations" would be rational and markets would be efficient. Keynes warned decades ago about the flaws in all this, but post-Keynesians thought they knew better. Nowadays, though, it is hardly possible to pick up a serious newspaper without seeing a reference to Keynes, often accompanied by the question "What would Keynes do now?"

Well, he certainly would not have started from here. As former MPC member Sushil Wadhwani recently put it, Keynes's fundamental insight was that "agents" (ie businesses, banks, consumers, etc) "often act irrationally and for non-economic reasons". For Lord Skidelsky, one of the leading biographers of Keynes, writing in the New Statesman, the "nutshell" of Keynesian political economy was that "booms were liable to lead to catastrophic collapses followed by long periods of stagnation. Governments had a vital role to play in stabilising market economies. If they did not, the undoubted benefit of markets would be lost and political space would open up for extremists who would offer to solve economic problems by abolishing both markets and liberty."

As the great man himself wrote: "The essential characteristic of capitalism [is] the dependence upon an intense appeal to the money-making and money-loving instincts of individuals as the main motive force of the economic machine." Happy new year ...

