Before we come to the most stunning reduction in official interest rates for some time, I should like to share with readers an (almost) historic event in Hamburg last week. 

The story began while I was recovering from the shock of being asked for 'photo ID' while buying wine in a New York liquor store. (It's a long time since I've been taken for being under 18.) David Marsh of the London and Oxford Group telephoned to say that my old friend and mentor Sir Samuel Brittan of the Financial Times had been forced to drop out of a planned panel discussion at the annual German-British Forum, and could I step in at short notice? Before I could hum or ha, David told me the other panellists would include Helmut Schmidt, former Chancellor of West Germany and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, former President of France. 

These great men dominated the European political scene in the mid- to late-1970s, and were the fathers of the European Monetary System, set up in 1979, whose origins I covered for The Observer. As President of the European Commission in 1977-81, Roy Jenkins was 'godfather' to the scheme. A seminal speech of his in 1977 set the ball slowly rolling (indeed, he advocated eventual monetary union), although both Jenkins, in his memoirs, and Giscard last week acknowledged that without the political muscle of Schmidt the EMS would never have happened. 

The EMS was created with the intention of forming a 'zone of monetary stability' in a turbulent world economy. Schmidt and Giscard were reacting to the chaos caused by the collapse of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system in 1971, and the first oil crisis of 1973-74. Schmidt is on the verge of his 90th birthday and Giscard is 82.

They were both excoriating in their criticisms of banks and the financial sector, but also of governments and regulators for having failed to intervene until the 11th hour. They were united in their belief that without the protection of the eurozone (which had, of course, evolved from the EMS), the current crisis would almost certainly have produced far more turmoil, including competitive devaluations, in Europe - witness the problems of countries such as Hungary. But they differed over the importance and practicality of proposals for 'a new Bretton Woods', with Schmidt calling volubly for a devaluation of the dollar and a revaluation of the Chinese yuan (to iron out the trade 'imbalances' that have contributed to the current crisis) and Giscard stoutly maintaining that 'currencies are not the instrument of the current crisis'. 

Giscard sees confusion in the public debate because 'there is not one crisis but two'. He distinguishes the banking crisis from a cyclical downturn in economic activity, emphasising that 'one could end before the other'. 

Of course, the problem is that the two are connected, and the banking crisis has fomented fears of a much more dramatic downturn than was being forecast as recently as this summer. Which brings us back to that remarkable reduction of 1.5 percentage points in the Bank rate, from 4.5 to 3 per cent. 

The first reaction was one of 'panic in the ranks'. The Bank certainly took people by surprise, half a per cent having been widely forecast, with the optimists hoping for 1 per cent. But it had been evident from recent speeches by members of the monetary policy committee that even the hawks were becoming concerned about the impact of the credit crunch and the remarkably rapid deterioration in the recent statistics for output, industrial investment and consumer spending.

It did not take the Chancellor's reminder in the Mais Lecture - that the Bank's remit allows it 'discretion about the horizon over which inflation is brought back to target' - to prod the MPC. My old friend and former MPC member Willem Buiter had moved within months from a hawkish position on inflation to advocating this very 1.5 point cut. Buiter is fond of quoting Macmillan about 'events', and the credit crunch and panic about bank lending, have certainly been events. 

Even MPC hawk Tim Besley has been worried about the 'transmission mechanism' of monetary policy. The old Keynesian concern that at times monetary policy can feel like 'pushing on a string' comes to mind. But let us hope the financial markets that were once supposed to be so perfect manage to sort themselves out. There is no question that we are well into a recession. Economic policy now is about trying to limit the damage and preventing something more like a slump. In which context, the importance of the US economy is such that much will depend on the expansionary measures in the pipeline from Barack Obama's embryonic economics team, and it is a relief that policy-makers in our main export market, the eurozone, have also seen the deflationary red light. 

It is noteworthy that Alistair Darling has added 'strong banks' to the familiar Treasury slogan about the importance of 'financial stability'. In the circumstances, one welcomes the Chancellor's Keynesian emphasis - 'when private activity slows, it is even more important to maintain wider public spending' - which is combined (and there is nothing un-Keynesian about this) with the commitment 'to return borrowing and debt to a sustainable level - once these shocks have worked through - just as we have in the past'.

In which context, depressed readers might like the following line from hitherto the most pessimistic member of the MPC, David Blanchflower: 'Modern economies have proved themselves resilient to downward shocks, and in the long run there is much about which we should be optimistic. Britain's economy will, eventually, recover.'
