So there I was, on the Hereford to Paddington train, dividing my time between reading matter, a post-prandial nap and appreciation of the Malvern Hills.

At some stage in the Cotswolds I was joined at my table by two beautiful women, who buried themselves in a sheet of building plans. In a very English way we kept ourselves to ourselves, and not a word was spoken across the table until Paddington, at which point one of my travelling companions said: 'I see you were reading the pre-Budget report.' She did not add 'get a life', so I ventured: 'Yes, and a book on the Great Depression.' 'Yes,' she replied, 'I saw,' adding, 'why are the Conservatives being so petty? Isn't the situation so serious that there ought to be a coalition government?'

Well, you only get coalitions in this country in wartime, but there is little doubt that the situation is serious. Now, Alistair Darling's pre-Budget report has received a bit of a pasting, but, as possibly one of the few people who have actually read it (there is nothing like a train journey for such things), I think it is a reasonable attempt to address the dilemma of how one tackles the immediate crisis - an economy that is looking as if it is falling off a cliff - while setting out a scenario for a return to financial rectitude in due course. Indeed, instead of being called the 'pre-Budget report', Darling's document could easily have been labelled 'the seven-year budgetary plan'. As the governor of the Bank of England told the Treasury committee last week, the 1 per cent (of gross domestic product) package meets the two key criteria of being temporary and setting out 'a very clear map and path back to fiscal sustainability'. Criticism of Darling has tended to focus either on the constituent parts of his reflationary package (it was ever thus) or on its so-called 'cost'. 'How are we going to pay for this?' people ask, or, 'will the financial markets be prepared to finance it?'

Quite apart from the fact that the financial markets do not even trust themselves these days, so that there is actually a huge demand for government 'paper', there comes to mind the way in which people with an axe to grind used to sneer with venomous intent, 'I'll make you pay for this.' For, I have little doubt that if we don't try to spend our way out of recession - and there is no other way - we shall be made to pay for it in that more unpleasant sense. A serious attempt to minimise the damage, and return to normal economic growth, will be a lot more conducive to our longer-term economic health than lamely sinking into the economic vortex by which we are now threatened. 

Manifestly, we should not have started from here. Like Mrs Jellyby in Bleak House, Gordon Brown gave the impression that he was more concerned about the problems of Africa during the last two years of his chancellorship than he was about his much vaunted domestic 'prudence'. But we are where we are, and many of those who worry about how to pay for sensible reflationary measures are the very same people who admire the pragmatism of US administrations - outgoing and incoming - which are prepared to spend multiples (in relation to the size of gross domestic product) of what the UK is planning. 

This is not to say that policy should be aimed at a return to the status quo ante. Plainly, the economy needed to be rebalanced from the insane emphasis on ever-increasing debt and house prices towards a more sustainable pattern; and, plainly, the belief that what mattered was financial services (do you remember financial services?) and not manufacturing, was always naive. The task now is to try to contain the damage. 

However, there is a limit to what even enlightened economic policies can achieve. For effect, they require a properly functioning banking system. 

But in the words of the great Paul Volcker, Alan Greenspan's predecessor at the US Federal Reserve (speaking at the recent Lombard Street Research/Churchill Archives Centre conference in London), 'this crisis reveals a broken financial system.' Volcker, at 81, is on top form, and, mercifully, has been put at the head of Barack Obama's embryonic Economic Recovery Advisory Board, which is charged with telling Obama how 'to jump-start the economy and stabilise the financial markets'. This is a tall order, but at the last count Volcker was 6ft 7in. He has been warning for years about the dangers of financial engineering and the banks' abdication of their prime function, banking. As for Greenspan's sudden admission that he got it wrong, Volcker compares this great discovery to the scene in Casablanca where Claude Rains, the police chief, declares: 'I am shocked - shocked - to find that gambling is going on in here.' 

The big question is whether a world recession can be prevented from turning into a depression. Expansionary measures of the sort favoured by the US and UK governments (it is not entirely clear where the UK opposition stands) are a necessary condition of recovery, but not sufficient. I have quoted Gladstone before, and I shall quote him again: 'Finance is, as it were, the stomach of the country, from which all the other organs take their tone.'

History suggests that financial crises and depressions go together. The present crisis of confidence, in the US, UK and many other countries, is largely psychological. Charles Kindleberger concluded in The World in Depression 1929-1939 that a major contributory factor was a lack of leadership: Britain couldn't lead and the US did not want to. Over to Obama, and his impressive economics team.
