So many people are climbing on to the Keynesian bandwagon that those of us who never jumped off it are now short of elbow room. There is, however, an important difference of approach between true Keynesians and those who have latched on to the popular excitement about possible tax cuts but argue that these would have to be 'paid for' by tax increases elsewhere, or by cuts in public spending.

The whole point about the worsening economic crisis is that we are in a hole and should not dig deeper. When the economy is booming it makes perfect sense to balance tax cuts in one sphere with increases elsewhere, or with reductions in public expenditure. Indeed, during the latter phase of his chancellorship Gordon Brown should have made a greater effort to balance the books. But that is all water under the bridge. Brown has moved on, and so have we - unfortunately, we have moved onwards, but downwards. 

Economic activity being essentially subject to cycles (sometimes known as periods of 'boom and bust') we shall emerge from this trough in due course, and firm plans will have to be in place for 'balancing the books'.

But at a time when businesses and their customers (known by the economists as 'consumers') are cutting back like mad, it is up to the governments to fill the economic void.

The dire turn that events have taken was spelled out day by day last week with a series of bad news stories about output, retail sales and employment. The unemployment figures are terrible and nearly all the economic news is worse than most people - not least the Bank of England - expected. Then came an implicit warning from the Bank that there was a limit to what monetary policy could do and that fighting the recession would require an old-fashioned fiscal stimulus - tax cuts or increases in public spending or both. 

The Bank confirmed that the economy was in recession and things were likely to get worse. It may be only a matter of time before its quarterly 'Inflation Report' is renamed the 'Deflation Report'. Its Financial Stability Report had already had already emphasised the seriousness of the credit crunch. 'Even after accounting for recently announced capital raisings which the UK government will help underwrite, the largest UK banks will need to shed around one sixth of total assets to reduce leverage back to, say, 2003 levels,' it said.

One of the reasons the government is so angry with the banks is that, despite capitalism's recent nervous breakdown, and notwithstanding the rescue operation by the public ward, the 'bonus culture' is still something certain bankers would like to cling to. (Under the bonus culture, it will be recalled, decisions were made not according to traditional banking criteria - good risk? bad risk? - but so as to maximise short-term results and accompanying bonuses.) 

For decades, the emphasis of economic policy has been on fighting inflation. The recession of 1990-91 was caused by tight monetary policy aimed at bringing down the rate of inflation after the Lawson Boom. 

It is a myth that that recession was caused by Britain's membership of the exchange rate mechanism, but it is certainly true that, once the savage monetary squeeze had done its work, the recession was prolonged by the maintenance of (domestically) unnecessary high interest rates designed to hold sterling within the ERM. 

The recovery of the economy after the pound's release from the ERM was greatly assisted by the subsequent devaluation of the pound. The period of 1993 to 1997 provides a not-too-distant example of how it is possible to run a seemingly alarming deficit during a recession and to tighten fiscal policy during the upturn. As noted in the Inflation Report, there was a 17 per cent devaluation of sterling between July 2007 and the beginning of this month. This belated adjustment ought to help exports, but demand for those exports will obviously be depressed by the recession in the US and key parts of the eurozone, such as Germany. 

It is no wonder that Brown is calling for a co-ordinated relaxation in economic policy around the world. 

As for consumer spending, by far the biggest component of demand in the economy, the Bank gloomily forecasts that rising unemployment will cause real incomes to contract, outweighing the benefits from lower commodity prices; other depressing factors will be tighter credit conditions and people's natural desire to save more for a rainy (or perhaps gale force?) day. 

Here again, if the private sector's savings rise and depress economic activity, then it is classic Keynesian policy for the government to fill the gap. 

There are all sort of complaints that 'tax cuts may only be saved' or that 'public investment takes too long to implement'. But all the evidence is that the poor don't take long to spend extra disbursements. And there is still plenty of eminently desirable investment crying out to be done in the much neglected sphere of social housing. 

Unlike the Treasury, I personally would like to see some high-speed rail links between our regions - they would do a lot more to narrow the 'North-South' divide than the recent crazy idea from a Conservative think-tank that people living in the north should be encouraged to move south. 

But, come to think of it, what we need from the privatised botch-up that we call our rail system is extra government spending to provide more reliable low-speed trains. The Southern Rail line to Chichester distinguished itself last Monday by being so hopeless that several of us had to abandon the train and spend a fortune on taxis in order to get to a family funeral on time.
