My good friend Gordon Brown has kindly sent me a copy of his new book Wartime Courage - Stories of Extraordinary Courage by Exceptional Men and Women in World War Two. The timing is accidental, but it is interesting that the economic situation is now so worrying that a Prime Minister who seemed so vulnerable two months ago, is now widely seen as a leader whose time has come. 

Comparisons with wartime and Churchill are, of course, far-fetched - although they have been fetched from no farther than certain sections of the media and one or two political spin-bowlers. Brown and his team should be wary of overdoing the 'world leader' stuff. I don't know about the blood, toil and sweat, but it could well end in tears. 

It is too early to judge whether the bail-out of the banks is going to be as efficacious as hoped; what is certain is that, at least for the time being, Tory economic policy strategists are rattled, hence their rescinding of the commitment to try to adhere to Labour's public-spending plans in the early years of a putative Cameron government. 

I was taught always to put oneself in the other person's position, although not necessarily for long. There are commentators who believe that shadow Chancellor George Osborne's return to a traditional Tory strategy of promising cuts in public spending is a far-sighted and brilliant wheeze. I don't see it, but perhaps I am too short-sighted. 

What manifestly infuriates the Tories is the way Brown, having spent years attacking them for preferring tax cuts to increases in public spending, is now planning tax cuts himself (we shall learn the details from Chancellor Alistair Darling's pre-Budget report tomorrow) to deal with what has become an economic emergency.

The government's justification, of course, is the one associated with John Maynard Keynes, who is supposed to have said: 'When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, sir?'. 

Now, there is considerable doubt as to whether the great man ever said that. For a start, facts don't change. Situations change and new facts emerge. But facts are facts, and they are sacred.

We have an interesting example of new facts from the deliberations of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee (MPC). There has been much criticism of the MPC for being so slow to recognise the gravity of the economic prospect, which is considered so dire by the Confederation of British Industry that it deemed it necessary to bring its quarterly economic forecast forward by a month (in, I think, an unprecedented move, although something similar may have happened during the three-day week in the early Seventies). As that relatively new MPC member Tim Besley pointed out last week: 'The oil futures curve, which was used in the August inflation report projections, suggested that oil would remain at $120 per a barrel for the remainder of the year. The current oil price is now below $55 per barrel.' So much for oil futures curves. 

The CBI compares the current recession, which is likely to intensify next year, with 1980-81, when the (almost) unbelievably inept economic policies of the Thatcher government aggravated the deflationary impact of the second oil shock (1979-80), producing a monetary squeeze principally via a cripplingly overvalued pound. 

A cripplingly overvalued pound is certainly not the problem now. After yet another long period of overvaluation, during which observers in Brussels mistakenly thought we were 'targeting' the euro, our currency is, mercifully, at a more competitive level. The UK cannot be accused of 'competitive devaluation' because it's the markets that have brought the pound down, without the help of the Chancellor - or even the shadow Chancellor. 

Which brings us to a fascinating admission from my old friend Lord Lawson, at a conference last week organised by Lombard Street Research and The Churchill Archives Centre. The subject of the conference was variously described as 'The global financial system in crisis - a symposium on the lessons of the past for the post credit-crunch future' and 'International monetary instability since 1968', and took in everything from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in 1968-73 to the 1976 sterling crisis and 'attempts at stabilisation': the Plaza and Louvre currency agreements of 1985-87. 

It was after the Louvre Accord of February 1987 to prevent the dollar from falling further (a 'managed' fall that had been sanctioned by the Plaza Agreement) that Nigel Lawson, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, embarked on the policy of 'shadowing the Deutschmark'.

Lawson was one of a galaxy of policymakers who were reminiscing at the event. He said: 'Looking back, was I too worried about inflation [when he began shadowing the D-mark in envy of Germany's record of price stability]?' Just think of it: is he now having second thoughts about the policy that led to his falling-out with Mrs Thatcher? I merely ask.

The big fall-out at the conference was over current policy. Lawson, in common with his former Treasury colleagues Lord Burns and Sir Peter Middleton, was suspicious of Brown's plans for a 'fiscal stimulus' (ie tax cuts and increases in public spending). But Lawson's close friend, economic commentator Sir Samuel Brittan, was strongly in favour of a major monetary and fiscal stimulus to avert a slump. 

Now, people occasionally talk about throwing 'everything except the kitchen sink' at a problem. A senior policymaker said to me last week, 'things are so bad that we should throw in the kitchen sink, too'. I agree.
