It is not an entirely unfair caricature of the potentially tragic preparations for this Thursday's world economic summit in London that, because of its folk memories of the Great Depression, the US is obsessed with boosting global demand for goods, services and hence employment, whereas the European Union, heavily influenced by German folk memories of inflation, is more interested in better regulation of "casino capitalism". 

Caught in the middle of this impasse is the British government, whose prime minister wants both, but who has been deeply embarrassed by the intervention of the governor of the Bank of England over the question of whether a further fiscal stimulus would be judicious. Mervyn King has made his views abundantly clear and even, it seems, given the Queen a first-hand account. Emphatically not, is the governor's position, and that, also, to coin a phrase, is the Treasury view. 

It is not for nothing that the US is more fearful of depression than the EU. As Christopher Dow points out in his book Major Recessions, in 1929 the gross national product of the US and Europe was about the same. Between 1929 and 1932, GNP in the US declined by 28%, whereas the fall in Europe was 7%. As Dow puts it, "Four fifths of the fall in output in industrial countries occurred in the USA." 

The US depression was transmitted to the rest of the world via international trade. But trade as a proportion of GDP was far smaller in those days. Globalisation has multiplied such proportions. Paul Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve before Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke, and recalled in his eighties to advise Barack Obama, recently said that he could not remember a time "maybe even in the Great Depression, when things went down quite so fast quite so uniformly around the world". 

Mervyn King, during a week when we learned that Japanese exports were almost 50% down on a year earlier, was reminded by a member of the Treasury select committee of his recent references to the severity of the "synchronised downturn" in the world economy since October, and asked about the outlook for growth (people are still using the word "growth") in Europe and the United States in the coming months. He answered: "Clearly in the short term it is not bright because the first quarter looks as if it could be even more of a downturn than the fourth quarter of last year." 

Now, as I have emphasised before, the pace of the downturn in the UK - put at a 7.25% annual rate by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research in the three months to January - is of Depression proportions. Russell Jones of RBC Capital Markets notes that: "Global industrial production is on track to fall at a stunning 30% to 35% annualised rate in the current quarter - significantly faster than the 20%-plus pace of decline in Q4 2008." 

To my mind it is not all surprising that Washington and Gordon Brown have been calling for a big fiscal stimulus. Although the European Central Bank is being characteristically cautious, its own monthly bulletin (for March) makes depressing reading. The ECB's polite, understated way of putting it is: "Looking ahead, the short-term outlook for overall activity remains bleak and output is expected to contract further in the course of 2009." The prospect for jobs is dire: those strikes and riots in France are ominous. 

Lutz Karpowitz, an economist at Commerzbank, says: " In our view, many negative factors have already been priced in for sterling, but not sufficiently so far for the euro." Which brings us back to the panic stations in the UK, and Mervyn King's part in the prime minister's loss of face.

I confess that, as one who often questioned the authenticity of the miraculous claims being made until relatively recently for the British economy, I am amused, but not surprised, at the speed with which the conventional wisdom has shifted towards the view that UK plc is a basket case. Thus, according to a recent report, "the risk is the UK will slip back to its 1970s and early 1980s pariah status in government bond markets, leaving the next government struggling to fund huge levels of borrowing". That rather subversive assertion came not from Conservative Central Office (as I continue to think of that renamed outfit) but from the news columns of the Financial Times

Panic spreads fast: sure enough, possibly helped (or not helped) by the governor's widely reported remarks about the fiscal position, there was a hiccup in the pattern of government bond sales later last week. 

Now, although I have little doubt that the governor wished to make a splash with his remarks; and although I am quite sure that the sound of the splash both amused the Treasury and was not unwelcome, I think his remarks need to be seen in the context of his emphasis on his hopes for the efficacy of the accumulation of monetary and fiscal measures. 

However, my suspicion is that the measures are not enough. As one leading industrialist said last week: "There is a stasis in the flow of credit to and between companies." So far monetary policy has been pushing impotently on a thread. The banking system needs to be rewoven. 

Yes, I understand the Treasury's worries about the size of the budget deficit. Yes, I admire the sophistication of the disturbing analysis in the Institute for Fiscal Studies "green budget" of January this year. But the depression-style deterioration in output is almost certainly making the underlying fiscal position look even worse than it is, and more - a lot more - may yet need to be done. At times like this budget deficits are not the problem: they are part of the solution.
