Last month I alarmed some readers by raising the possibility that, far from this being another recession - to be compared, or not, with the recessions of the mid-1970s, the early 1980s and the early 1990s - if we were not careful we might find ourselves on the verge of something more like a Depression.

I am not using the royal "we". The "we" includes all of us: the bankers and policymakers who have between them contributed to the current crisis, and the rest of us, whether categorised as "entrepreneurs", investors or plain consumers, who appear, collectively, to be in a state of near-panic.

Such feelings of panic are not necessarily irrational. The openness with which policy makers ranging from president-elect Obama and Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke to our own Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling are talking up the scale of the crisis is evidence in itself. In my youth, official economic forecasts would be revised perhaps once or twice a year. Now they seem to be in the process of being revised monthly - and always for the worse.

The rate at which industrial production around the world has fallen, and unemployment risen, within the past few months is frightening. If the pace of deterioration is maintained, the word "Depression" could be on everybody's lips in a matter of months. A fall of 1.5% in the UK's real gross domestic product during the fourth quarter of last year may not sound much, but it amounts to an annual rate of 6%. The fall from peak to trough in UK GDP during the Great Depression of 1929-33 was 5%.

Of course it may turn out - I repeat, may - that the fourth quarter of 2008 saw the worst of the economic collapse - I imagine Baroness Vadera hopes so - and that things will improve, or cease deteriorating, from now on. But the traditional relationship between falling output and orders, and the impact on unemployment, is such that, even from what we know already, unemployment will go on rising for some time to come.

And it certainly does not feel as if the worst is over - or even yet upon us. Hopes of recovery are based on the assumption that all the billions being pumped into the economy, combined with the impact of lower prices, not least of oil, on purchasing power, will eventually prove efficacious in reviving the demand in the economy.

But the worry is that there is a yawning gap between now and when all those measures might be expected to make their impact. To be brutally frank, the much-feted bail-out of the banking system has not bailed out the economy. The situation is reminiscent of, but far worse than, the position in the early 1980s when at the height (or depth) of what I christened "sado-monetarism", good companies were on their way to the wall, the Thatcher government did not seem to understand or care, and the Bank of England rightly embarked on a period of covert rescue operations.

There is no doubt that this government cares; but there is equally no doubt that the toxic effect of years out of office made New Labour reluctant to the point of pusillanimity when it came to nationalising strategic parts of a failed financial sector.

Now, the fact that this is a worldwide crisis indicates that what we are experiencing is not entirely the government's fault. Nevertheless, even the person in the Clapham DVD shop knows that many of the excesses were home-grown.

But enough of that. Let us return to that yawning gap: the economic situation is so dire that many good companies are wondering whether they can legally carry on trading, because business conditions, severely aggravated by lack of what was once considered routine banking credit, raise the threat of insolvency in parts of the business world that were never before reached.

This is why organisations such as the Confederation of British Industry are shouting so loud and lobbying so hard. It is clear that both the chancellor and the ubiquitous Lord Mandelson have begun to recognise the scale of the crisis, and tens of billions of public money are being sprinkled about to ease the plight of industry, as well as the position of the banks.

The City economist Chris Iggo, of Axa Investment Managers, has suggested: "The financial system is not going to collapse. All the policy steps since September have increased the defences around what is left of the global banking sector. Balance sheets are being shored up... the quality of the capital structure of banks is being improved." With more, presumably, to come, Iggo concludes that this means "a stronger banking sector in the end".

The bad news is that "all of this has negative consequences for the economy". And it is these negative effects that lie behind the recent rate of deterioration and the threat of outright Depression.

Of course, generations of economists persuaded themselves and others that this kind of thing could never happen again. As the Nobel laureate Paul Krugman recently reminded us, Milton Friedman claimed that the Great Depression could have been avoided if the Federal Reserve had provided banks with more liquidity. But all the liquidity recently provided by the Fed has not put the fire out. Keynes was right about the ineffectiveness of monetary policy in such circumstances. Hence the vast, Keynesian, fiscal stimuli now on offer around the world.

But are they vast enough? They are certainly a necessary condition for alleviating the crisis. Whether they are sufficient is another story. Keynes regarded monetary policy as being like pushing on a string at a time like this. But he took a functioning banking system for granted...
