Roll up, roll up - 33.3 per cent off. Borrow now while stocks last. There is no getting away from it. It is panic stations. Two months running, the Bank of England's monetary policy committee has reduced the Bank rate by a third - from 4.5 per cent to 3 per cent and from 3 per cent to 2 per cent. As readers of headlines were made aware last Thursday, this is the lowest official rate since 1951 - indeed, it is as low as it has been since the inception of the Bank (not just of the monetary policy committee, you understand) in 1694. 

Things are looking grim. Now, recently I was taken to task by a New Zealander (critics can come a long way to make a point) for allegedly understating the extent of the crisis. My defence - that perhaps I was conscious of how 'the media' are always accused of 'hype' - fell on stony ground. It was the media's duty to tell it as it is, I was firmly told. 

This was at one of the proliferating one-day conferences on the credit crunch. I am told that at another such conference last week the mood was apocalyptic, but that lots of people were in high spirits (although not necessarily on them). Unfortunately, the humour was of the gallows kind. But we have learnt that the Queen is not amused. It was recently reported that she asked why she (and we) had not been warned about the impending crisis. 

Well, I am glad to report for the benefit of non-readers of the Financial Times that the monarch has sparked off a lively correspondence in the FT's letters page, from readers eager to sing the praises of many a not-so-false prophet. The basic message is that we may have been robbed, but we were also warned. Indeed, on one vintage day, an FT reader sang the praises of one particular analyst, and beneath his letter that very same analyst was to be heard (metaphorically speaking, of course) blowing his own trumpet. 

By now the Queen will have been made aware that the warning notes were indeed sounded. But the problem for all of those economists and analysts who foresaw the collapse of the modern version of what the left used to call 'finance capitalism' was one of timing. Thus, in an extremely well argued book, Debt and Delusion, the City economist Peter Warburton spotted the seeds of modern financial engineering's own destruction way back in 1999, but wrote 'if nothing of a cataclysmic nature has occurred in the global financial system by the end of 2003, then it will truly be a miracle'.

Again, the sainted Professor Wynne Godley has the distinction of having warned for a very long time not only of the dangers being courted by the Bush administration in respect of its insouciant disregard of the US balance of payments deficit, but also of the perils of the degree to which the UK private sector was living on credit and piling up debt. 

Godley and others (including your correspondent) were very critical of the Thatcher government's obsession with the money supply in the early 1980s. But we always took more seriously the statistics for the growth (or not) of credit. The monetarists used to be concerned about printing money; when their equations collapsed simultaneously, they gave up monetarism in favour of 'inflation-targeting'. We reached the stage where, to paraphrase a great Galbraithian chapter heading, it was a case of 'In Central Banks We Trust'. But the fact of the matter is that, while inflation was nominally under control, the house-price boom and the credit-card culture meant that, in effect, the US and UK economies were printing money as if there were no tomorrow. 

A host of others were concerned about asset price inflation and the growth of 'debt financing'. But as policymakers, financial engineers and the general public are now realising, the economist Lionel Robbins was spot on (in The Great Depression, 1934) with his aphorism: 'To prevent the depression, the only effective method is to prevent the boom'. 

Gordon Brown promised to put an end to 'Tory boom and bust'. Instead he gave us 'New Labour boom and bust'. But to be fair to him, he is not the only suspect. Our Prime Minister and former Chancellor cannot be held responsible for the threat of economic depression that now hangs over the world. 

Sorry, did I use the word 'depression' - a word that, as my New Zealand interlocutor noted, I have assiduously been avoiding? Well, I hope I am not being alarmist, but everything I hear 'off the record' from bankers is truly frightening; and industrial production around the world in recent months has either been falling at alarming rates (as in the US, Europe and Japan) or its growth has been decelerating fast, as in China. 

It was in reaction to the economic and social horrors of the 1930s, and the subsequent world war, that our leaders constructed an international economic and financial system (known in shorthand as 'Bretton Woods') aimed at cooperation rather than beggar-my-neighbour policies. The era that followed was the most prosperous in history. The problem now is that countries such as the US and UK need to 'rebalance' their economies towards slower growth in consumer spending (not the complete collapse that is now threatened) and more exports, while Asia in general (where exports account for 45 per cent of gross domestic product) and China in particular need to boost what economists call 'domestic demand'.

One hopes that the catastrophic failure of the London Economic Conference of 1933 was not a harbinger for what can be expected from the economic conference of world leaders that Gordon Brown is due to host in April. But, frankly, I'm getting worried.
