This is not a biblical quotation, unless you regard that great American president Franklin D Roosevelt as having been of biblical status: "The money changers have fled from their high seats in the temple of our civilisation." It comes from FDR's 1933 inaugural address, as does: "Faced by the failure of credit, they have proposed only the lending of more money."

Yes, history only repeats itself up to a point. This time, the almost universal cry is hardly that the bankers are proposing the lending of new money, rather that they are not. 

Indeed, the main focus of the current crisis, in which a rapidly growing recession threatens to evolve into a depression, is the shortage of credit or bank lending. This is the major concern of everyone in this country from the prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer to the director-general of the Confederation of British Industry. And the ever-vigilant Professor Wynne Godley, in the latest of a series of prescient economic analyses from The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College in New York state, has pointed out that "net lending to the [US] private sector fell between the third quarter of 2007 and the third quarter of 2008 by an amount equal to about 13 per cent of gross domestic product - by far the steepest fall over such a short time in the history of the series". What is more, Godley and his colleagues calculate that such lending will have continued to fall at around this rate up to the present quarter, and that the process will continue. 

The especially worrying thing about this analysis - and Godley's record in warning about the excesses of deregulation and the associated credit explosion is exemplary - is that, even with the devaluation of the dollar and the fiscal stimulus, the US economy will be running a dangerously large balance of payments deficit, with all that that implies on the protectionist front. 

It was accepted way back in the 1930s that, if the US economy sneezes, the rest of the world catches a cold. There has been a long gestation period for this latest sneeze and, unfortunately, the metaphors that come to mind are not so much colds as influenza and even pneumonia. 

This is not to say, pace our prime minister, that the present crisis is entirely the consequence of the spin-off from the US sub-prime crisis. We had our own credit boom here - in the decade from 1997 to 2007 incomes (as measured by what is technically known as "real household disposable income" - ie, after tax) rose significantly more slowly than retail sales in every year but 20O5, the gap being filled by sensational growth in consumer credit, which latter was to no small extent "backed" by the illusory "wealth effect" of rising house prices (which did not figure in the official inflation indices).

Having said this, I should like to register a concern that we are now experiencing an overreaction. The debt culture was certainly overindulged, but some of the public reaction now - "all debt is a bad thing" - threatens to have its own pernicious effects. The fact of the matter is that a capitalist economy runs on debt; it is just that banks and consumers need to regain a sense of proportion. In particular, while it is a truth universally acknowledged that savings and investment are a good thing, it is also a truth - less universally acknowledged, despite all the efforts of Lord Keynes and his followers - that if everybody increases his or her savings at a time like this, then the economic situation can only get worse. Someone should remind David Cameron of this fundamental Keynesian insight. 

In which context, I think it is apposite to try to counteract the rewriting of history that I suspect is having a malign impact on a Conservative party which is the favourite with the bookmakers to win the next election. 

The Conservatives' obsession with cutting public spending at a time of recession goes back to my old friend Sir Geoffrey (now Lord) Howe's budget of 1981. The myth is that the famous 364 economists who wrote a joint letter to the Times to oppose Howe's 1981 budget were wrong, and that cutting public-sector borrowing gave birth to economic recovery. What in fact happened was that unemployment went on rising until 1986; true, the economy stopped deteriorating further, but that was thanks to the beneficial influence of the late Sir Alan Walters, who played an important role in relaxing monetary policy and nursing the exchange rate down (a policy switch of which the 364 economists were inevitably unaware at the time they wrote). 

The most important thing about the UK, US, and indeed world economies at the moment is that they are suffering from a deficiency of what economists refer to as "aggregate demand" - total spending on goods and services, by the private and public sectors. This is seriously deficient, and still heading in the wrong direction. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research estimates that real GDP plunged at a sensational annual rate of 6% in the fourth quarter of 2008. In the 1970s, the UK's problem was the closed shop; in 2009, it is closed shops.

Now, in the era of Madoff economics there were all sorts of things wrong with the distribution of the fruits of economic growth and the balance of the economy, and some kind of reaction was inevitable. But, for all the worries about the size of budget deficits, when the private sector is having withdrawal symptoms and the financial system is experiencing a nervous breakdown, only government spending can fill the gap.

As the great economic historian Charles Kindleberger wrote in The World in Depression, 1929-39: "A nation can finance anything it can produce."
