Way back in the 70s, I wrote a light financial thriller called A Real Killing. It did quite well, although it did not make a financial killing for me. Now, I am absolutely convinced that if I had named one of the central characters Mr Madoff, my publisher would have said: "Don't be ridiculous - think of a more plausible name."

Yet, that is of course the real name of the Wall Street character who was cultivated by so many because his funds made suspiciously high, regular returns. Unfortunately, this was apparently out of one of the oldest dodges in the book - a so-called "pyramid" scheme under which the dividends are provided by filching the money from new deposits. As long as the pyramid is rising, everything is all right for the swindler. He is only found out when things go into reverse, and people want their money back. (I have always thought the phrase "pyramid selling" was unfair to the original pyramids, which have lasted a lot longer than pyramid schemes.)

But, somehow, the emergence of what is being described as the biggest fraud in history just seems par for the course these days. It is symbolic of the era of excess that may be at an end; and, as the economic news goes from bad to worse, nothing seems to surprise us, not even that a British politician who rashly promised an end to "the policies of boom and bust" has been recovering his position in the opinion polls.

Incidentally, if the prime minister's colleagues and spin doctors have any sense, they ought to play down suggestions that Gordon Brown is in some sense enjoying this crisis. That, frankly, is not what the unemployed, those fearful of becoming unemployed and businessmen in dire straits wish to hear. Good luck to a leader whose time has come; but steady on.

Perhaps I am old-fashioned, but I find talk of a "snap election" to capitalise on the public's apparent desire to "keep a-hold of nurse, for fear of finding something worse" just a little distasteful. In any case, goodness knows what ghastly economic and financial news might emerge in the course of an election campaign.

For the fact of the matter is that there is panic in the ranks now throughout the once-feted "globalised economy". The reduction in US official interest rates to zero last week was the latest indication of how desperate policy makers are now. When interest rates are at zero, by the way, the difference between monetary policy (changes in interest rates and/or the stock of money) and changes in fiscal policy (tax rates and public spending) becomes cloudy. One noted economist last week suggested that "fiscal policy and monetary policy become the same". As governments and central banks contemplate a desperate resort to the printing presses (or technical moves in the money and bond market which amount to the same thing: as Edward G Robinson once said: "Don't bother me with the de-tails'), the attempt to boost purchasing power resembles further tax cuts.

In which context I find the revival of the Ricardian notion that tax cuts are ineffective because people know taxes will rise in the future about as convincing as those other two economic doctrines that ought by now to have been consigned to the scrapheap: "rational expectations" and the so-called "efficient markets hypothesis".

The current crisis has finally put paid, as it were, to both these theories and, after a generation during which the economics profession has been producing articles whose very titles are often incomprehensible, one thing the impending economic slump will have achieved is a return to first principles.

Anyone who doubts the degree to which modern conventional economic wisdom has blown up in its propagators' faces need look no further than the recent Confessions of a Former Master of the Universe, which is not as yet the official title of Alan Greenspan's next book, but which epitomises his recent message to US congressional hearings.

And now a word from our sponsors: among the many people with whom I sympathise at a time such as this are the government's economic forecasters. Although in the early days of the Brown chancellorship the Treasury's experts persistently surprised their critics, they have recently run into a bad patch. Their broad message now is that everybody should retain a sense of proportion and that, by the second half of next year, the British economy should be "picking up", powered by the combined forces of a massive devaluation (which is aimed as much at encouraging "import substitution" as exports - which latter face the obvious problem of weak overseas demand) and the expected boost to purchasing power from the combination of much lower oil and commodity prices; reduced taxes; and the quite dramatic easing of monetary policy.

There is, however, a catch. This crisis is unlike those of the 70s, the early 80s and the 90s because it has become essentially a crisis of trust and confidence. Western capitalism has had a nervous breakdown, and the financial system is broken. It may be that everything miraculously improves in 2009, but it may not. These days black holes are not confined to outer space. Eat, drink and try to be merry. A Happy Christmas to all my readers.
