Mervyn King takes pride in his speeches, which are always elegant, and do not read as if they were written, or 'drafted', by a committee. The governor's speech in Leeds last week was widely reported, and had quite an impact on the nation as well as on the financial markets. 

He began gently enough, with a reference to his first memories of Leeds, when he saw those great Surrey and England cricketers Jim Laker and GAR (Tony) Lock bowl New Zealand out in the summer of 1958, on a drying wicket, for 67. 

Oh, happy memories of a recession-free age! I myself had the good fortune two years earlier to see Laker take all 10 Australian wickets for Surrey before he went on later in the summer to take 19 wickets in the Old Trafford test. 

The impact of a great afternoon's cricket at Leeds was to make the governor decide to become a slow bowler - slow left-arm. I myself was - and still am, up to a point - a slow (right-arm) leg-break bowler.

Now, when a right-arm leg-break bowler wishes to spring a surprise, he may bowl a 'googly' - a ball that spins in the other direction. When a left-arm bowler gets up to such tricks, the delivery is - or used to be - known as a 'chinaman'. 

Last Wednesday night the governor delivered a chinaman. While most of the media coverage concentrated on King's declaration that the economy was in recession, what struck the financial markets, and your correspondent, was the following passage: 'There are, though, questions about the source of the [government's] funding and the level of borrowing by the country as a whole from overseas. For several years, the UK banking sector has been relying extensively on external capital flows, principally short-term wholesale funding, to finance its lending activities. Those external inflows have fallen sharply - a mild form of the reversal of capital inflows experienced by a number of emerging market economies in the 1990s.' 

This analogy with emerging markets - however 'mild' - prompted concern among analysts, as Derek Halpenny, of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, indicated to the Financial Times.

But the Governor went on: 'Unless they [the external inflows] are replaced by other forms of external finance, the adjustments in the trade deficit and exchange rate will need to be larger and faster than would otherwise have occurred ...'

Now, regular readers will know that this commentator was concerned for a long time about the overvaluation of the pound until relatively recently. However, the effective exchange rate (an average of movements against the dollar, the euro and other currencies) has fallen by some 13 per cent in the past two years, and history suggests that when economic policymakers 'talk the exchange rate down', things can get out of hand. 

It so happened that the Governor's remarks coincided with a revival of the fortunes of the dollar, so that the pound fell by 4 per cent against the dollar in one day, prompting one newspaper to proclaim 'Governor gives pound an extra pounding.' One hopes this was a one-day wonder. It would be unfortunate if, after all the boasts about this government's pursuit of 'stability', and the perceived success (at least until recently) of the monetary policy committee, it were all to end in an almighty sterling crisis (it would only be from such a position of weakness, by the way, that the government would dream of signing up for the single currency). 

But let us return to the recession, which is now official. It is evident from the latest Confederation of British Industry industrial survey, and from the invaluable Bank of England regional agents' reports, that the country's economic performance and outlook have deteriorated rapidly since the early summer. Professor David Blanchflower's colleagues on the MPC must now realise that he was right to be so alarmist about the way things were going and about the need to ease policy. 

Much attention has been paid to the forecast by the independent National Institute of Economic and Social Research that the nation's total output, or gross national product, is likely to fall by 0.9 per cent next year.

This is nowhere near all those wild comparisons with the Great Depression of 1929-1933; but it does evoke memories of the recessions of the mid-1970s, the early 1980s and the early 1990s. 

However, where the gloomy public mood may be more in tune with independent economic analysis and forecasts is in the outlook for consumer spending. The NIESR's forecast is for a sharp fall of 3.4 per cent (in real terms, ie adjusted for inflation) in consumer spending between this year and next. This would compare with a reduction of only 1.5 per cent in real consumers' expenditure in 1974; hardly any reduction during the manufacturing recession of 1980; and a 1.6 per cent fall during the post-Lawson-boom recession of 1991. The combination of the credit crunch and the inevitable reaction to the debt explosion and 'living beyond our means' of recent years leads the NIESR to believe that 'the sharp fall in consumer spending next year will occur as the saving ratio rises from 0.7 per cent of disposable income [that is, income after tax] in 2008 to 4.4 per cent in 2009 at a time when real income growth remains paltry'. 

It is good news that the Chancellor of the Exchequer is emphasising the importance of Keynesian policies at a time like this. We don't want a 1981-style budget that encourages unemployment to rise even further. The state of the banking system makes one wonder whether monetary policy, once described as 'pushing on a string' at times such as this, now evokes comparisons with pushing on a thread.
