In the good old days 'bankers' ramps' were associated with attempts by various elements in the City of London either to bring Labour ('socialist!') governments down or to clip their wings severely. But bankers have become a lot more sophisticated. To judge from the recent panic in the ranks of the US Treasury and Federal Reserve, the modern bankers' ramp seems to involve a threat to bring down the entire US financial system unless the taxpayers rescue them from their follies. 

The initial euphoria about the proposed US government $700bn bail-out of the financial system was short-lived. Congressmen discovered last weekend that the people they represented - many of whom were doubtless homeless as a result of the unscrupulous marketing to them of sub-prime mortgages by 'dodgy' lenders - were understandably not at all amused at the prospect of bailing out a failed financial system with taxes levied on wages and salaries that were infinitely lower than the bankers' own emoluments. Hence the hard bargaining by congressmen for conditions to be imposed on those bankers being rescued; congressmen who knew that, while they were being subjected to the biggest blackmail operation in history ('financial socialism!'), in the end they probably had no alternative but to bow to the pressure. 

The pleas of President Bush, of WMD fame, would not have been enough. But Ben Bernanke of the US Fed is infinitely more trustworthy, and Henry Paulson, the Secretary to the Treasury, does not come with invented-WMD baggage - indeed, in his previous role at the top of Goldman Sachs, he must have had considerable experience with weapons of financial destruction. 

However, as Sir John Gieve, deputy governor of the Bank of England, said last week: 'The headlines are about the drama on Wall Street, but the failure or rescue of even big and well-known financial firms matters mainly because of their knock-on impact on the wider economy.'

Which brings us, once again this week, to the old-fashioned Daily Express question: 'What's in this for Britain?' If the US banking system is saved, and the US economy does not implode in Bernanke's nightmare scenario, that will also be some consolation to the rest of the world economy, including the UK. Last week, while the news was dominated in the US by the proposed bail-out, and in the UK by the 'get-out-of-jail-free card' that the financial crisis had offered Gordon Brown ( 'this is no time for a novice'), our policymakers on the Bank of England's monetary policy committee (MPC) were out in force. The most optimistic (or least pessimistic) was Andrew Sentance, who insisted that while we are in for one or two quarters of what economists quaintly refer to as 'negative growth', nevertheless 'the current prospect for the UK economy is very different from the major recessions [of] the mid-1970s, early 1980s and early 1990s' when 'economic activity fell sharply for one to two years'. Sentance stated: 'In the second half of next year we should see a gradual recovery, as the spike in inflation would be behind us and the growth of real incomes should resume, stimulating consumer spending.' 

One detects a gloomier view from Gieve, who warned that 'any contraction in lending to the real economy can amplify the slowdown in demand... the process of deleveraging that was designed to alleviate pressure on banks' capital position can lead to an additional wave of credit losses... the risk we must be careful not to underestimate is the deflationary consequences of the credit crisis.' 

And Professor David Blanchflower, the MPC's leading dove, forecasts a 'strong decline in demand' and that unemployment will rise 'quite considerably'. This suggests to me that the debate at the MPC is going to become quite heated, and that our beleaguered Prime Minister may find, to his (and our) relief, that the MPC may decide to ease monetary policy, which, without its lifting a finger, has tightened anyway because of the renewed freezing-up in the inter-bank lending market, to say nothing of the slowdown and higher rates prevailing in the mortgage market and in day-to-day dealings between banks and their customers. 

Last week, the collapse of confidence among banks was so intense that the commercial banks preferred to deposit some £6bn with the Bank of England in midweek (at relatively low rates of interest) rather than rely on normal overnight borrowing and lending between themselves. Ever assiduous on his readers' behalf, your correspondent telephoned the Bank, and asked whether nervous members of the public were allowed to avail themselves of the same facilities, but it appears not. 

Oh, I nearly forgot: that Labour party conference! You would have thought, given the failure of the Reagan/Thatcher model of excessive deregulation, that the atmosphere in Manchester would have been one of relief that so much of what 'real' as opposed to 'old' Labour people believe about unfettered markets has turned out to be right. As the Chancellor said, in that understated way of his: 'It's clear we have to put in place measures to stop problems being repeated. It's clearer than ever that markets can't do this on their own.' 

Unfortunately, New Labour went along with the worship of the false god, and only now are we promised 'effective regulation'. Alas, last week the prevailing impression was one of Labour party fatigue and internecine strife. 

And when I asked a Mancunian whether the locals thought the government was in danger of falling apart, he replied sharply: 'It is falling apart.'
