When the paperback of Alan Greenspan's The Age of Turbulence landed on my desk recently I couldn't help noticing the recommendation on the cover; indeed, I almost fell off my chair. Greenspan was described as 'Master of the financial universe' by ... 'William Keegan, Observer'. Greenspan's star is in decline these days. Had your correspondent really been quite so enthusiastic in reviewing the hardback last year? 

Well, not exactly. Penguin Books had meted out the kind of treatment familiar to theatre critics when they write 'this play is so bad it is amazing' and the quote is shortened to 'amazing!'. 

What I had actually written was that Greenspan, when chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board, was 'widely regarded as master of the financial universe'. A slight difference, surely...

But it is interesting that so many commentators who once really did seem to think Greenspan possessed divine powers are breaking ranks and blaming him for at least part of the crisis that has forced the US government (the dreaded public sector!) and the Federal Reserve to come to the rescue of the US, and, by extension, the Western world's financial system. 

The charge is that, for all his concern with the 'irrational exuberance' of the markets, he did not do enough to prevent the swelling of the asset price bubble; indeed, that his relaxed monetary policies allowed that bubble to grow and grow. 

The interesting thing about the Greenspan era was that you would have expected this very right-wing conservative to be more concerned about inflation and asset-price bubbles than about employment. As Fed chairman he was often reticent, Delphic in public; people hung on his every word and he used to joke: 'I should warn you, if I turn out to be particularly clear, you've probably misunderstood what I've said.'

However, some visitors used to find that in private the Fed chairman couldn't stop talking. Having experienced an hour of such expatiation on one occasion, an international official resolved next time to interrupt the great man with the question: 'Mr Chairman, what do you see as the role of the Fed?', the kind of straight , simple inquiry that used to be known in Fleet Street as 'the Daily Express question'.

Greenspan looked quite astonished at being interrupted, but gave a most revealing answer: 'The role of the Fed is to ensure conditions such that the average American who wants to find a job can find one.' 

Employment, rather than prices, came first to mind, though the emphasis on 'who wants to find a job' carried its own message. It helps to explain the Republican Greenspan's unexpectedly expansionist - many now say overexpansionist - bias in office. Alas, both in the US and Europe we now have a concatenation of a burst bubble, a financial crisis, a cyclical downturn and a commodity price shock.

Commodity prices may be easing, but the effect of the previous prolonged rise has, paradoxically, been both inflationary and deflationary: inflationary because of the effect on prices; deflationary because that very effect has made the Bank of England and the European Central Bank reluctant to reduce interest rates. 

Now, as John Llewellyn notes on page 6, the latter phase of Greenspan's tenure was characterised by pronounced fears of the damage that could be caused by deflation. Ben Bernanke, the present Fed chairman, was there at the time, and his work on the Great Depression and the prolonged Japanese deflation of the 1990s was influential in the bias of policy making.

Meanwhile in the UK from 1997 onwards, New Labour continued the growth-oriented policies of Ken Clarke. Having attacked the Thatcher government's dismantling of credit controls in the 1980s, and having been suspicious of 'finance', which Winston Churchill had declared should be 'less proud', Labour acquiesced in the excesses of the financial sector. The Blair/Brown government seemed to take positive pride in the size of the City of London's contribution to gross domestic product, rationalising away the competitive problems of manufacturing that were associated with the prolonged strength of the pound.

Finance became prouder and prouder. Many, but not all, bankers forgot or abandoned basic principles. The house of cards has collapsed. And those fundamentals of financial dealings, trust and confidence, have evaporated.

Even those of us who have been going on about the dangers of the house price spiral, the consumer debt mountain and the worship of 'financial engineering' are surprised by the sheer speed with which confidence in the most respected of financial institutions collapsed last week. As one battered banker said: 'There is no organisation that cannot potentially fail, because the whole world can bet against you.'

Enjoying the benefits of 'leverage' - profitable operations based on an inverted pyramid of debt-financed operations in a bull market - was compared by another banker to 'going up in an escalator' whereas 'deleveraging' is like 'going down fast in a lift'.

Whatever the concerns about 'moral hazard' (bailing out erring bankers so they are not discouraged from behaving badly all over again), policy makers have to balance such concerns against what Professor Charles Goodhart calls 'economic hazard'. George Soros says 'saving the system trumps moral hazard'. 

However, that seems a bit like socialism for the rich from people who would never sanction it for the poor. One hopes, at least, that governments will be less pusillanimous about credit controls and banking regulation in future.
