When they are staring into the abyss, people tend to step back, provided that the balance of their mind, or body, is not disturbed. 

With their sensational 'bail-out' (they prefer to call them 'rescue') packages, the US and UK bodies politic have stepped back from the brink. Huge amounts of concerted assistance to the money markets by the leading central banks, and that co-ordinated round of reductions in interest rates (including by the European Central Bank), have also been steps in the right direction. 

But the terrain that was rashly traversed en route to the abyss, and across which we must return, is still very rocky - indeed hazardous. Before the recent outburst of sanity among our economic policymakers, there was a growing danger that capitalism would seize up, and that comparisons with 1929-32 would seem less far-fetched. 

Thanks to the rescue operations, we may be warding off an economic depression, but still face recession; analogies with the 1970s, suitably adjusted, may not be inappropriate. 

The speed last week with which a leaked UK government/Bank of England £50bn package of assistance to the banks and money markets was transformed into £500bn was mind-boggling - though the extent to which the taxpayer is exposed has been seriously exaggerated by alarmists. 

Nevertheless, this partial nationalisation of the banks is going to be temporarily expensive and nerve-racking, even if much of the 'contingency' money is never drawn upon, and even if, as the optimists hope, most of it is repaid. Whatever they say, it is difficult to believe that the taxpayer is going to end up in profit, given what is commonly called the 'toxic' nature of so many of the loans. 

Communism collapsed in the late 20th century, although 'market-communism' survives in China. But we now know that 21st-century Western capitalism cannot function unless it is underpinned by socialism, in the shape of vast injections of public funds.

There has, understandably, been much criticism of the City bonus and distorted incentive structure, which combined with all that 'financial engineering' to produce the current mess. But many of the people now being rescued by the public sector were in the vanguard of those who believed in shrinking the state. To paraphrase Clement Attlee, a period of silence on their part would be welcome. 

As the financial phoenix arises from the ashes, the damage is such that it might not be an exaggeration to say that the bail-out means that taxpayers are lending money to bankers who will be very reluctant to lend it back to them. These were 'operators' who had the nerve to claim that their business was assessment of risk, but who inflicted this crisis on the rest of us through their bad decisions. 

Although attention in Britain during the past week has inevitably been focused on the reaction of the British government and the Bank of England, and although our own 'boom and bust' cycle is one of the contributing factors to the recession that seems to be upon us, the crisis is global financial cooling, as opposed to global warming. As the distinguished Italian economist and former Finance Minister Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa said last week: 'This is not a crisis within a system. This is a crisis of a system.' 

He was speaking at the launch at the London School of Economics of the English version of Fabrizio Saccomanni's book Managing International Financial Instability, the timing of whose publication could hardly be better. Saccomanni is director-general of the Bank of Italy, and the essence of the problem of international financial instability is epitomised in his subtitle 'National Tamers versus Global Tigers'. 

After the Great Crash of 1929, and subsequent Depression, capitalism was saved from the threat of communism by a combination of Keynesian economics and the post-war Bretton Woods system, which brought reasonable, rules-based international cooperation until the early 1970s. 

Saccomanni provides us with a superb history of all the crises since the 1970s, and how national policymakers (the 'tamers') have struggled with global markets (the 'tigers'). He puts recent events in context by pointing out that 'unsustainable increases in asset prices, followed by sharp declines, have been a recurrent feature of the operation of stock and real estate markets since the end of the Second World War, but that 'with the accelerating pace of financial globalisation during the 1980s, the magnitude and repercussions of the asset-prices boom-bust cycles have increased significantly... indeed the policies introduced by Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan can be regarded as the "displacement" that set the stage for the tensions which have since reverberated across the global financial system and the world economy'. 

Saccomanni's message is that 'recurrent monetary and financial instability may foster protectionist tendencies lingering in both industrial and emerging countries'.

Although the co-operative effort by central banks last week was a relief, we have seen some disturbing nationalistic and protectionist tendencies, not least in Europe. Padoa-Schioppa said last week that recent events constitute 'the sunset of the extreme view of naive belief that markets can function without regulation'. Saccomanni, also with a wealth of experience, believes the answer lies with 'institutionalised co-operation ... where the pursuit of a collective interest requires a co-operative act of intervention'.

Is the present crisis sufficiently serious to offer such hope? Or are we in for protectionism and nationalism all over again? Time, surely, for the European Union to get its act together.
