The Governor of the Bank of England is to be congratulated. He has done the decent thing. Mervyn King may not be short of a bob or two (after all, his institution prints the money), but in a City of London where until recently greed has known few bounds, he has turned down an offer of an increase of a third - repeat one third - in his salary, and settled for 2.5 per cent. 

All right, his salary is not inconsiderable, and he can look forward to a very comfortable pension. But, at a time when the rest of the country is being asked to make sacrifices, King has set a rather better example than many of our elected representatives at the other end of town. What is truly remarkable however, and indicative of the 'on-the-make' and insensitive attitudes prevailing in the City of London during recent years, is that an 'external review' body should have recommended an increase of over 30 per cent at a time like this. Talk about 'inflation busting...'

Now, loath though your correspondent is to quibble, it would have been even better public relations if my friend the Governor had settled for 2 per cent, which is after all the inflation target, and the maximum pay increase which the Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer insist can be afforded in the rest of the public sector. Indeed, there has been a certain amount of industrial unrest over the government's refusal to meet a public sector workers' wage claim of 2.4 per cent. 

While we are on the subject of the Prime Minister and the Chancellor, this column has always been on the side of the underdog and one hopes they have a decent break in August. As a former Prime Minister who knows what it is like to be pilloried by the press and not to enjoy the full trust of one's colleagues, John Major has been expressing moral support for Gordon Brown.

Alistair Darling is widely seen as Brown's poodle, but has his pride. He recently distanced himself from the disastrous 10p tax decision by telling the New Statesman that he had seen the problem coming, adding: 'It was a costly mistake for us, because after 10 years of systematically going through the tax system to help the middle- and lower-income people in this country ... this appeared to send a different message.' Darling knows it is his job to take the flak, but there is a limit. 

These are interesting days, what with the annual rate of inflation rising from 3.3 per cent in May to 3.8 per cent in June (against that target of 2 per cent), and the latest recruit to the Bank of England's monetary policy committee - career official Spencer Dale - telling the Treasury Committee, 'I expect to see the pass-through from the recent increases in food and energy prices to cause CPI inflation to move substantially [my italics] higher over the course of this year'. 

I have pointed out before that, at least on the wages front, we are nowhere near the inflationary horrors of the 1970s; nevertheless, with the debate among economists ranging between whether we are moving into recession or actually there, these are rough times and likely to get rougher. Suddenly the national unemployment and vacancy figures - unemployment is rising; vacancies are falling - are becoming newsworthy and yet another embarrassment to a Labour government. 

Not all the bad economic news is the government's fault, but it was a huge mistake to have claimed to have abolished 'boom and bust', and so the government can hardly be surprised if most of the blame for the end of what Mervyn King called the NICE decade (non-inflationary, consistently expansionary) is laid at its door. The cliche 'hubris' comes to too many people's lips. 

Another MPC member, Andrew Sentance, was very plain spoken recently about the higher unemployment that lies ahead, as an MPC concerned about inflation keeps interest rates 'on hold' when the clamour grows for monetary easing. I have lost count of the number of analyses that have crossed my desk using that familiar description that the MPC is 'between a rock and a hard place'. Of course there will be many businesses and individuals up and down the country for whom the 'hard place' is not so metaphorical and threatens to be all too real. 

No, boom and bust were not abolished. There is such a thing as a business (or trade) cycle. There is also an energy-price cycle. We are even rediscovering something from those 18th and 19th century economic histories: the crop cycle - or perhaps we should call it the genetically modified crop cycle. The food price problem is not home grown; and the rise in the price of oil and energy generally is not the government's fault. But Brown and his merry men took full credit, as it were, for the upward phase of yet another cycle - the credit cycle; now they are inevitably receiving a lot of the blame on the downside. 

Whether one approached it from a traditional Keynesian perspective - too much credit growth - or a monetarist one (rapid increases in the money stock) the writing was on the wall for years. And almost everybody, outside the inner Brown circle, was worried about the way that the government continued to run deficits during the good times. 

The big question now is: does the rapid deterioration in the economic outlook mean that we are near some kind of precipice? I note with interest that even hardline monetarists are not advocating higher interest rates, despite the inflation picture. Indeed, some of them are very worried.
