A leading economist recently delivered a very gloomy talk on the outlook for the economy. Afterwards a friend commented: 'I was really surprised at how gloomy you were.' 

'Oh' came the reply, 'I don't believe a word of it.' 

The friend breathed a sigh of relief. At which point the speaker continued: 'No, it's far worse than that.' 

The point is not only that the credit crunch is serious, but that it is being superimposed on an economy already in trouble. Although in their more hubristic moments politicians and economists who should know better have proclaimed the death of the business cycle, the proclivity of the national - and international - economy for cycles of 'boom and bust' has never been overcome and probably never will be. 

The economist Joseph Schumpeter, himself an expert on the 'capitalist' business cycle, thought this was a good thing. 'Capitalism,' he wrote, 'is by nature a form or method of economic change and not only never is but never can be stationary ... This process of Creative Destruction is the essential fact about capitalism.'

In theory, enlightened economic policies can moderate the workings of the business cycle. In practice, the last half century has brought the Maudling Boom of the early Sixties, the Barber Boom of the Seventies, the Lawson Boom of the Eighties and the (hot from the presses) Brown Boom. (For younger readers, these booms are for convenience labelled by the names of the Chancellors of the time, although in the case of Chancellor Maudling the boom was encouraged by Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, and the driving force behind the Barber Boom was the determined figure of Prime Minister Edward Heath.)

The interesting thing about the Brown Boom is that it lasted longer, thanks to the impact of cheap Chinese goods on the rate of inflation (it is usually a scare about inflation that induces policymakers to slam on the brakes), and to the mixture of deregulation and changing social mores that produced a 'debt doesn't matter' culture (at least until now). But it was an 'asset price boom' rather than the traditional one in which excess demand would produce an overheated economy, wage inflation, and what economists sometimes termed 'over-full' employment.

Indeed, in some respects the economy in general was less volatile than in previous cycles; and the overall rate of growth did not appear to reach the excessive and unsustainable extremes of previous booms. But when it came to house prices and levels of debt, some unfortunate records were notched up.

The credit crunch is being imposed on US and UK economies that were, and are, suffering from what economists call 'imbalances'. Both have been living way beyond their means, and a period of retrenchment and adjustment was already in train before the panics of recent months.

It is not much consolation that some of us have been warning for years of the dangers of free-market capitalism pushed to the limit. 'Here we are,' as Harold Macmillan once said, 'and the question is: where do we go from here?'

The statistics for the real economy have suddenly taken a turn for the worse; and the rate, for instance, at which the advance indicators from the Institute of Purchasing and Supply are deteriorating suggests that recession is upon us and may be here for some time. 

It was that great public servant Christopher Dow who used to say in July 'things will look very different in September'. And so they often do - this time with a vengeance.

The last of Dow's many great works was Major Recessions - 1920-1995 (OUP, 1998). In examining the Great Depression of 1929-1932, he wrote: 'Bank failures did indeed have a major effect in accentuating the depression, quite largely by reducing the amount of bank credit available to business.'

It is no wonder that, as Western policymakers flounder around, they are so worried about the banking system. The decline in the prices of houses and other assets brings to mind the finding of that great economic historian Charles P Kindleberger: 'When price declines lead to bankruptcy, that bankruptcy spreads through the system in cumulating fashion with results that are not offset elsewhere' (A Financial History of Western Europe). For Kindleberger, the number one lesson was 'to guarantee the liabilities of the bank or banks in trouble'. 

And what about moral hazard - or concern that protecting the system, however errant the behaviour of certain bankers, will encourage more folly in the future? I once met Kindleberger. I can imagine his sardonic mood when he wrote: 'A few hardline believers in efficient markets contend that financial crises can cure themselves.' 

One can understand the public anger with those bankers who have pushed the opportunities afforded by deregulation (and by the collective sleepiness of regulators) to the limits; and it is essential that there should be a massive quid pro quo for public-sector rescue operations (which, as US experience demonstrates, are not easy to agree). But it should not be forgotten that 'moral hazard' is at the heart of the capitalist system - it is there in the very concept of limited liability and the bankruptcy laws. A remarkably high proportion of 'new businesses' are not even businesses three years from inauguration. They fail, and creditors suffer. 

It's not the end of capitalism. But for the time being I am reminded of the Foreign Office official who was asked by the press for a quote after the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of 1939: 'All I can say is that all the 'is-ms' are now 'was-ms.'
