So is Gordon Brown going to stay the course? Declarations of intent have come from the horse's mouth: 'I'm going to take the economy through these difficulties,' he stated last week on a BBC Newsnight programme that seemed to be meeting obstacles in its search for the Prime Minister's 'economic plan'. He said it again, in the current New Statesman, when asked about the unhappy state of an economy about which he used to boast: 'I think the first thing people want us to be able to do is to see ourselves through this difficult challenge.' 

And difficult it most certainly is. The economic and financial news seems to get worse by the day. Amid all the gloomy pronouncements about the erosion of confidence in manufacturing, the building industry, retailing and the City of London, I was particularly struck last week by a statement from David Frost, director-general of the British Chambers of Commerce. 

Older readers may recall that several months ago, while being rather pessimistic about economic trends myself, I reported that Frost believed the economic situation was not as gloomy as all that, especially outside the south east.

However, things have moved on - or perhaps back. The results of the BCC's latest quarterly survey 'signal a menacing deterioration in UK prospects', says its economic adviser David Kern. David Frost himself talks of a 'real risk of recession in the coming months'.

Only last week I reported how some industrialists had warned about the dangers of 'talking ourselves' into a recession. But at the rate things are going such talk may be otiose. 

So what is the economic 'plan'? First, let me say that I am surprised that the Prime Minister has allowed the word 'plan' to be allowed out into the open. One of the themes of his chancellorship and premiership is his determination to rid New Labour of past associations, and the very word 'plan' raises the spectre of what were widely considered the embarrassments of the national plans of the 1960s. But in New Labour's lexicon surely it connotes little more than a batch, or series, of ad hoc measures designed to alleviate spreading economic hardship - a situation that has arisen as a result of a most unfortunate conjuncture of the 'bust' that was not meant to follow the boom; the associated credit crunch; and the deterioration in our terms of trade resulting from the sharp rise in the price of food and (much more so) energy. 

The arrogance of the view that the boom and bust cycle had been abolished, and the inevitability of the bust are vividly brought out in The Gods that Failed (The Bodley Head) by Larry Elliott and Dan Atkinson. The implications of the deterioration in our terms of trade (which, bluntly, means that we as a nation can buy fewer imports with our exports) have been repeatedly spelled out by the Bank of England. The ramifications of the credit crunch are still not entirely clear, but it has been a question of so far, so bad. 

The Prime Minister was in enough trouble before the economic atmosphere turned sour, but he had previously invested so heavily in his own economic prowess that the impact on his personal ratings in the opinion polls is hardly surprising. According to a recent Populus poll, 'a mere 25 per cent believe Mr Brown is up to the job of being Prime Minister', and only 26 per cent think Labour is the best manager of the economy, as opposed to 39 per cent for the Conservatives. 

Yes, whatever other reasons there are for the Prime Minister's unpopularity, the deterioration in the economic outlook weighs heavily on his reputation. 

But there is nothing new under the sun. After the devaluation of the pound in November 1967, the approval rating of the then Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, also went into free fall. It had been 57 per cent in February 1967; it was 27 per cent in May 1968. Yet Wilson recovered so well that he only just lost the general election of 1970 - and actually won the election of February 1974 . 

At a time when there is so much speculation about the Prime Minister's future, I should like to share with readers an extract from a remarkable interview that Professor Peter Hennessy and Dr Jon Davis, of Queen Mary College, London, conducted with Roy Jenkins. The latter, years later, was reminiscing about the coup that never happened, in July 1968, when Jenkins was Chancellor and potential ringleader. 

'I think if I'd been Lloyd George or Mrs Thatcher or maybe even Harold Macmillan I might have done it then. But I was really Rab Butler. I also had the kind of conviction that the government was so unstable at that stage that if I'd tried to knife Harold Wilson I'd have brought the whole government down. And my job as a beleaguered Chancellor was to get on to try to sort things out. And insofar as I fluctuated from that it was for not entirely noble motives as I didn't want anyone else - I suppose I meant Jim Callaghan or maybe Denis Healey - to become the Crown Prince-over-the-water so far as the anti-Wilson forces were concerned ... I didn't want to strike but I didn't want to put anyone else in the picture. That's the most honest answer I can give you.' (5 May 1999) 

I don't know what current members of the Cabinet will make of that. What is obvious to anyone is that, if one may say so with the utmost possible respect, the present Cabinet does not obviously compare with the giants of the past. Gordon Brown may be a sad disappointment so far. But is there another serious candidate?
