During the 1980s there were few sterner (and more entertaining) parliamentary critics of chancellor Nigel Lawson than Gordon Brown - not least when Brown stood in for John Smith as shadow chancellor after the latter's first heart attack. However, political life being what it is, New Labour not only accepted much of the deregulation, privatisation and markets-know-best baggage that it inherited; it proceeded to give the impression that it was having a love affair with doctrines that it had once despised. 

As my old acquaintance Ken Livingstone said in a school hall in Highbury last week: "The tragedy of New Labour was to accommodate to the Reagan/Thatcher consensus." Livingstone was speaking at a fundraising event for a local charity, the Islington ("Kids Afloat") Boat Club, a worthy organisation that unfortunately had to compete with a rather more well attended cup-tie nearby.

It says something for dedicated politicians such as Livingstone that they are prepared to turn out on such occasions. Our Ken is in great demand at home and abroad. His particular passion that evening was climate change, on which issue - never knowingly under-controversial - he seems to be placing his faith in undemocratic China to take the lead, given the resistance to change in the democracies. (I merely report: this column is usually a climate-change-free zone.)

Livingstone was speaking the day after Brown said in an interview with the Guardian: "Laissez-faire has had its day. People on the centre-left and the progressive agenda [sic] should be confident enough to say that the old idea that markets were by definition efficient and could work things out themselves is gone." Again: "The 40-year-old prevalent orthodoxy known as the Washington consensus in favour of free markets has come to an end."

The odd thing is that this ought to be the perfect time for a left-of-centre party to be on the up. Lord Turner himself, the new chairman of the Financial Services Authority, has attacked "light-touch regulation" and embarked on a serious campaign to prevent banks from taking on excessive risks. 

Unfortunately for Brown, however, New Labour was up to its neck in light-touch regulation - and now finds itself touching the rest of us rather heavily for the money to bail out the financial system. The prime minister has discovered, rather late in the day, that "only progressive, centre-left governments can address the problems of the global change". 

This discovery has been made when New Labour is approaching its 13th year in office, and our former chancellor is being blamed for failing in his attempt to abolish "boom and bust" - indeed, for the onset of the depression. He rightly argues that the crisis was not entirely home-produced, but the general view is that he protests too much. He has been attacked for failing to show contrition, but I thought I heard him go to the other extreme on the BBC Radio 4 programme You and Yours, when appearing to claim "I'm responsible for everything that's happened" [my italics].

JK Galbraith's The Great Crash has been much in vogue recently, but the great man issued plenty of other warnings, not least in his History of Economics (1987), when he wrote: "There are some economic lessons that are never learned. One is the need for the most profound suspicion of innovation in matters concerning money and more generally the field of finance." 

Now, I am not against the City of London per se. It has made a valuable contribution to our economy for several hundred years. But much of the contribution during the past 20 years has been of dubious value, and it was this that New Labour bought into, while neglecting our manufacturing base. By the way, that such manufacturing nations as Germany and Japan are also suffering serves to emphasise the seriousness of the world depression.

In the (very) long run there will be a recovery, and one can only welcome the Pauline conversion of Peter Mandelson - who was so relaxed about the "filthy rich" - to the importance of British manufacturing. But I doubt whether the secretary for trade and industry, as I continue to think of his bizarrely named department (Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform), is quite so relaxed about the task he faces. 

One of the books to which New Labour should have paid more attention is The View From No 11 by that previous chancellor whom Brown used to goad so successfully - my old friend Lord Lawson. In the vanguard of the deregulators, he concluded that "a financially deregulated economy, while more efficient and dynamic, is also probably less stable, by virtue of an amplified credit cycle". Even Lawson was cautious about the reform of the building societies: "I was unwilling to go the whole hog. Under the new act they still had to raise the bulk of their funds from retail deposits and put most of their assets into straightforward home mortgages." 

Lawson now wishes to revive the old legislation by which retail banking - which ought to be routine and boring - and more adventurous "merchant" or "investment" banking were separated. I agree. That Lehman Brothers was an investment bank does not alter the fact that bringing casino capitalism into routine banking was a disaster, and has given a very bad name to the broader capitalism in which Lawson so strongly believes. 

In the run-up to this crisis we did not just experience speculative bubbles. Our society was drenched by speculative foam. The cleansing operation is going to be a long haul.
