'It's boom, boom Britain' was a favourite headline of the popular press in the old days. Unfortunately, the booms were followed by what became known as the 'busts'. These were not necessarily recessions - periods of falling output, or what economists quaintly call 'negative growth'. They might simply have been periods of slower growth as, for instance, followed the Maudling Boom of 1963-64, named after the Conservative Chancellor of the Exchequer Reginald Maudling, who famously said to James Callaghan, his Labour successor, as he handed over the keys of 11 Downing Street (in a reference to the state of the budget and the balance of payments): 'Sorry, old cock.' 

The Barber Boom of 1973 was certainly followed by a bust. That boom, which could equally have been called the Heath Boom (as prime minister Edward Heath had a huge influence on economic policy), was not brought to an end solely as a result of a normal 'boom-and-bust' business cycle reaction: there was also the little matter of the first oil crisis of 1973-74, when the price of oil quintupled. 

The Lawson Boom of 1987-88 was like Maudling's up to a point: its origins were domestic - an over-rapid expansion; but in Maudling's day there had been all manner of official controls to prevent excessive lending and borrowing. However, the Thatcher/Howe/Lawson government had made a fetish of the removal of 'controls', so that the Lawson Boom had more scope, and was more dramatic, than the Maudling one. 

The way that the economy ran into trouble after such booms was an important influence on Gordon Brown, who, as Chancellor, made a point of associating 'booms and busts' with previous Conservative regimes, and rashly gave the impression that, under New Labour, they were things of the past.

The Maudling experience was too distant for most members of Brown's generation. The big 'busts' on most peoples' minds were the recessions of 1980-81, under what I christened the 'sado-monetarist' policies of the first (1979-83) Thatcher government, and 1990-92. This latter constituted the inevitable 'business cycle' reaction to the Lawson Boom, aggravated by the need, under our ill-fated 1990-92 membership of the European exchange rate mechanism, to keep interest rates much higher than was wise from the point of view of domestic policy (to maintain the exchange rate under ERM rules). 

The scene shifts to today, or rather to last week, when the newspapers and airwaves were full of gloom and doom, and industrialists whose views I respect pleaded with me to pronounce in this column that 'we must not talk our way into recession'.

Also, last week a central banking official told me about a review during the nervous economic atmosphere that prevailed in 1998, which concluded that at times of financial and economic nervousness, it is the 'doomsters', rather than 'consensus' commentators, who dominate the airwaves. 

This said, I have a modest contribution to make to the debate. This contribution, which is most certainly not designed to talk us into recession, derives from my hunch that the combination of the oil crisis, the credit crunch and the natural 'business cycle' reaction to the Brown Boom could deliver a recession even if everybody stopped talking about it. But I hope that such a recession might still be avoided if policymakers are sufficiently astute and, let's face it, sufficiently lucky. 

I should like to start by retelling a remark made by an old friend: 'We know,' he said, 'what the Federal Reserve is worried about (a 1929-style Depression); and we know what the Bank of England is worried about (Seventies-style stagflation); but what on earth prompts Monsieur Trichet to raise interest rates?'

Well, I think the president of the European Central Bank is worried about the 'flation' side of stagflation, and fears that if central banks are too 'accommodating', despite the manifest economic slowdown, we shall witness the need for the kind of drastic deflationary policies of the early Eighties, to remove 'flation' from the system. 

Now, at this stage I should like to pay a heartfelt tribute to William (Bill) White, who has just retired from being economic adviser to the Bank for International Settlements in Basle, the 'central bankers' bank'. In common with Martin Wolf of the Financial Times, I have often drawn attention to White's warnings about the dangers attached to the way the financial system has pushed things to the limits. If White's warnings had been heeded, there would be a lot less talk about 'bust' and 'credit crunch'. As the BIS annual report points out: 'The fundamental cause of today's emerging problems was excessive and imprudent credit growth over a long period.' White and the BIS warned long ago about the need to pay more attention to 'asset bubbles' and what they call financial innovations that have 'heightened what seems to be an inherent tendency to "procyclicality" in liberalised financial systems'. 

Now, 'procyclicality' is jargon for the tendency of markets to push things too far. The BIS would not have started from here but, while recognising the danger of 'a cumulative downward momentum in the [G7] economy that could all too easily get out of hand', nevertheless points to the immediate threat of rising inflation and advocates 'a bias of global policy towards being much less accommodating'. 

My worry is simple: the tendency of markets to push things too far applies on the downside, as well as on the way up. Is it wise to be 'less accommodating', ie to raise interest rates, at a time when the markets themselves are deflating like mad?
