On the latest Private Eye cover is a photograph of Ed Balls, the Schools Secretary (not the school secretary) looking over the shoulder of a young schoolgirl seated at her desk. He is depicted asking: 'Are you doing Sats, little girl?' She replies: 'No, I'm marking them.' Luckily, unlike some modern politicians, Balls has a sense of humour. 

Not for the first time, Private Eye hits the bull's-eye. Haunted by past defeats, New Labour came into office determined not to be outdone by the Conservatives, not least in worship of the private sector. Outsourcing the marking of British examination papers to the American private sector is par for the course. And the idea of children marking their own test papers fits neatly with a popular culture in which it is often the case that the 'customer' is expected to do a lot of the work. 

The ultimate example of the obsession with 'outsourcing' is the infamous private finance initiative, or PFI. 

The current issue of Public Money and Management (Wiley-Blackwell for the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy) contains a disturbing article by Allyson Pollock and David Price about the PFI, concluding that 'the government's central justification for PFI in terms of risk transfer (which it acknowledges is more expensive than conventional public finance) remains largely unevaluated'. 

Even without the impact of the PFI, the government's finances are in trouble - such trouble that the recently leaked news about impending revisions to the 'fiscal rules' produced a surprisingly calm reaction. Gordon Brown had done his credibility no good by continually revising his definition of the 'cycle' during which the public sector's current budget was supposed to balance. But the corollary of this was that by the time the Treasury conceded that the game was up, the news was regarded as a very small earthquake. 

It is just as well that the ground is being prepared for toleration of a more relaxed fiscal policy in the short term. With the Bank of England's monetary policy committee seriously considering raising interest rates because it is so concerned about the short-term outlook for inflation, a fiscal tightening now would be the last straw, and almost certainly induce the recession that many people fear, but neither the Confederation of British Industry, nor the National Institute of Economic and Social Research believes is a certainty. 

Thus, while reporting slowing demand and declining business confidence, CBI economists celebrated the 50th anniversary of their valuable Quarterly Industrial Trends Survey last week by emphasising that the gloom should not be overdone. Nevertheless, there were concerns about cost pressures, which will only go to feed the MPC's worries about short-term inflationary pressures. I plan to be a long way from Threadneedle Street when the MPC announces its August decision on interest rates and unveils its inflation report, but if I were on the panel, I should certainly not vote for a rise in interest rates at a time like this. However, to judge from the minutes of this month's meeting, the August decision may be a close-run thing. The MPC is acutely aware of its counter-inflation credentials, and, even if the longer-term forecast is of a return to the status quo ante on the inflation front, most members apparently do not wish to be seen to be 'soft' in the face of monthly consumer and retail price figures that might approach 5 per cent, however temporarily. 

In this, what I suspect is a quorum of MPC members have the National Institute on their side. An unusually direct NIESR review states: 'Given the rise in inflation expectations, the Bank of England should raise the base rate by a quarter of a point to signal its determination to meet the 2 per cent target.' 

The NIESR boldly forecasts 'the economy will escape recession'. Nevertheless, the debate about 'recession' is quite subtle. Although annual growth in 2008-10 is expected to be 'the weakest since the early 1990s', such growth as there is (or will be) will come (according to NIESR forecasters) principally from a long-delayed boost to the trade balance, via the impact of the lower pound in boosting exports and discouraging the growth of some imports .

It may well feel like a recession to the consumer (you and me). Indeed, 'over the next couple of years consumers will be affected not just by declining housing wealth but also by falling equity prices, tightening credit conditions and sluggish growth in real disposable incomes. 

'As a result, consumer spending is forecast to start falling in the second half of this year. The contraction will carry on through most of 2009, resulting in a fall of 0.8 per cent, the first annual decline since 1991.' (By contrast consumer spending grew by more than 3 per cent in 2007, these figures being in 'real' or 'volume' terms, after allowance for price changes.) 

Rubbing home, as it were, the extent of the average consumer's financial problems, the annual report of the Bank for International Settlements contains a table showing that between 1998-2002 and 2003-07 the proportion of outstanding debt owed by British households (including mortgage debt) rose from the equivalent of 72 per cent of GDP to 94.3 per cent. Wow!

The crunch has come, and it is Alistair Darling's lot to come clean about the impact on the Budget. As Harold Macmillan says in Howard Brenton's wonderful Never So Good: 'Fascinating thing, the economy. Almost mystical. Being Chancellor of the Exchequer is rather like being a priest in Ancient Rome, staring at the entrails of a slaughtered goat. You are sure that if you read the mess in front of you right, you will know the future.'
