Have you noticed that, when the British economy is doing well, it is entirely because of the brilliant economic policies of New Labour and the independent Bank of England, but when things go wrong the rest of the world is to blame? 

I am reminded of a story by Henry Woolf, the actor and poet who encouraged Harold Pinter to try his hand at writing plays: 'It's a funny old world,' Henry used to say. 'Yes, Henry,' Pinter would reply, 'but the world isn't entirely to blame.' 

At all events, while the nation worries about the degree to which boom has turned to bust, the Chancellor - sorry, the Prime Minister - goes on the Today programme to reassure us that it is not his fault, and that he is busy taking 'the difficult long-term decisions' that affect us all. 

This must be good news for Westminster and Whitehall, where the buzz for months has been that the Prime Minister is not very good at taking short-term decisions. But - who knows? - if you spin a short-term decision out for long enough it can become a long-term decision.

One of the things that worry me most about this crop of ministers is the proclivity they have for beginning a reply with words such as: 'And I'll be honest about it.' That kind of approach leads me to start counting the spoons. If someone says, 'Let me be perfectly frank,' then I expect to hear it straight from the shoulder. But the ' ... and I'll be honest about it' approach makes one wonder how often they are not being that honest.

Which brings me to the faultline that runs through modern Britain, and is not irrelevant to the issue that seems to have dominated the local election campaign - namely the embarrassing episode of the abolition of the 10p tax rate. The faultline is the product of the worst aspects of Thatcherism and of New Labour's craven response to those aspects on finally assuming office. 

The faultline is manifested in the way that the Thatcherite trinity of privatisation, deregulation and 'profit above public service' has blurred the lines of managerial responsibility in this country to the point where it is usually difficult and often impossible to find where true responsibility lies. The blurring of responsibility goes right to the top. One of the problems with the confused official reaction to the Northern Rock fiasco was that each of the partners - the Treasury, the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority - had some kind of veto on what action to take. The governor, Mervyn King, who is in a very strong position in his second term, made it clear during his reappointment hearing in front of the Treasury committee that he wanted clear lines of responsibility in the revised regulatory arrangements. 

So is it the world economy, the US sub-prime crisis, the price of oil, and the price of food that is responsible for our present economic woes, as the government would have us believe? The answer is: up to a point, Lord Levy. The credit boom was the outcome of Thatcherite deregulation, irresponsible behaviour by banks and building societies, and an extraordinary cultural shift in which the 'Anglo-Saxon' economies stretched the concept of 'hire purchase' for domestic capital goods (consumer durables) to the point where the prevailing culture became one of 'buy whatever you feel like now; get one free; and pay later when the bills come in, at exorbitant rates of interest'.

While New Labour was lecturing the eurozone on how to run an economy, the pound was overvalued, the City of London was deified (although it has hardly worshipped New Labour in return), and manufacturing industry was neglected. Once again, our reappointed governor uttered some important truths last week when, in addition to his much-publicised complaints about City bonuses, he pointed out that the Bank of England existed to promote a prosperous economy throughout the UK, and was not interested only in the City. He also had some harsh words to say about 'off balance sheet financing'. And I think I heard him say in an aside that this did not apply only to the banks, in what I took to be a swipe at the Private Finance Initiative, which has caused such chaos. Indeed, it is rumoured that on present trends rent on the Treasury's own PFI building would absorb 80 per cent of the department's budget by 2050. 

Many of this government's problems stem from the paranoia about the press and 'middle England' that gripped both Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. As Chancellor, Brown pursued 'redistribution by stealth'. He seems genuinely hurt at the criticism that he of all people should have made up to 5.3 million people worse off by removing the 10p tax rate in the 2007 Budget. He must be especially sensitive about the two men - Frank Field and Robert Chote, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies - who have come back to haunt him. 

The brevity of Field's ministerial career (1997-98) was accounted for by a falling out with the then Chancellor. And it is no secret in Fleet Street that Chote's career as economics editor of the Financial Times (1995-99) was cut short because the Treasury made life difficult for him. Chote has publicised the '5.3 million losers' figure. He must derive some satisfaction that his word carries greater weight in this matter than the government's.
