As Gordon Brown celebrates (or not) his first year in the job he always wanted, the similarities and differences between the economic problems facing this government and the Labour governments of the 1970s are arousing a lot of interest - and not a little sensitivity. 

One irate Labour figure took exception to my reference last week to the stratospheric rates of inflation in 1975, mistakenly concluding that I was blaming the Callaghan government, although James Callaghan did not take over the premiership from Harold Wilson until March 1976. 

The confusion arose, I believe, because the government's Letter of Intent about economic policy (which accompanied the request for a loan from the International Monetary Fund) was sent in 1976 under Callaghan, but the stratospheric rate of inflation (25.9 per cent) quoted in the letter referred to the 12 months to October 1975, under Wilson. One of the points of the letter was to explain how policy was being set in 1976 to bring inflation down from those scary heights.

In the past few weeks I have had interesting conversations with Denis Healey, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer during those difficult times, and Michael Foot, Leader of the House of Commons under Callaghan. Both attest to what a great Prime Minister Callaghan was, in extraordinarily difficult circumstances. Healey recalls just how difficult life was for that Labour government when its paymasters, the trades unions, were so demanding, and the left so strong. Tony Benn has managed to achieve saintly status as the voice of reason in recent years, but to Callaghan and Healey he was a complete menace. 

Foot recalls of Wilson in his latter days that 'his eye was not on the ball' and that 'the atmosphere of his leaving [there were all sorts of unfounded suspicions] did not help'. The Labour government of 1974 had inherited the well-meant but disastrous 'threshold agreements', involving automatic wage increases in response to cost-of-living increases, a process that got completely out of hand via the upward ratcheting of the price of oil in the wake of the 1973-74 'oil shock'. They may have made mistakes with too ambitious a target for a reduction in pay increases in 1978-79, but Healey and Foot resent how both Tories and New Labour have tended to disparage that government, which did in fact make use of hard-bargained incomes policies (Foot regards the union leader Jack Jones as a hero in this respect) to bring inflation down. 

Incidentally, those who castigate the Labour government of the time, which saw inflation fall to 10 per cent in 1979, conveniently forget that under the first year of the Thatcher government it rose again to more than 20 per cent. 

The retiring deputy governor of the Bank of England, Rachel Lomax, recalled the difficulties of that decade in some farewell remarks last week. When she joined the Treasury in 1968 inflation and the economic growth rate were both roughly what they are now; then came stagflation. She trusted that, as she departed from public service, a repetition of the kind of inflation experienced in the 1970s and 1980s was not in prospect, thanks to the innovation of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee and its rigorous brief to aim at an inflation target of 2 per cent.

Now it is common knowledge that the MPC has not been hitting the bull's-eye recently and has had to write a letter to the Chancellor explaining itself. Further, on the admission of the Bank's Governor, Mervyn King, the MPC confidently expects to keep up a regular correspondence with the Treasury for some time. 

King and some of his colleagues took great pains to explain to the Treasury Select Committee last week that they had not taken their eye off the inflationary ball. The Governor summarised thus: 'The immediate cause of the rise in inflation we are seeing now is a change in the prices of food and energy relative to other prices. This will push up the overall level of prices but it cannot, by itself, produce sustained inflation unless we allow other prices and wages to rise at a faster rate... So although inflation is rising now, we will ensure that it falls back to the 2 per cent target.'

The squeeze on average real incomes (that is, incomes after price increases) is very embarrassing for a deeply unpopular government that made the mistake of giving the impression it had discovered the economic philosopher's stone. Already there have been prime ministerial and chancellorial hints that interest rates should be lowered. But between the lines of extensive statements from the Governor and his colleagues is the message that, to get inflation down, they are duty bound to tolerate lower growth and higher unemployment for the time being.

There have been hints, not least in remarks by Sir John Gieve, departing joint deputy governor, that there is a danger the ramifications of the credit crunch could lead to overkill. One MPC member, Professor David Blanchflower, is so worried about the collapsing housing market that he wants a rate cut now; others have contemplated voting for an increase, but subsequently desisted. 

A big unknown is what happens to the oil price. At a seminar organised by Lombard Street Research last week, Peter Davies, former chief economist of BP, argued that once the demand/supply imbalance in the oil market has been resolved, the price could fall from some $140 a barrel to around $70. No doubt this would suit the MPC's game plan.

One thing is certain: this is a big test not only for the MPC, but for its creator, one Gordon Brown. Can the Bank of England be sure there will not be political interference with its independence?
