The concurrence of the row over the removal of the 10 per cent tax rate and the £50bn (plus?) being made available to the banks to solve their liquidity problems has certainly captured the public imagination. Was this a Labour government making 5.3 million people worse off in order to please middle England with a 2p cut in income tax? Was this the political party that used to complain about being subjected to a 'bankers' ramp' or con, bailing out the banks while penalising the poor? Most of the people I meet are somewhat puzzled. They feel they should be told.

In the old days bankers would advise customers on how to handle their financial affairs. Nowadays, it seems, bankers need advice from their customers on how to handle their own financial affairs. Mervyn King is both the governor of the Bank of England and a bank customer. He has been extremely reluctant to bail out the banks from the consequences of their own folly, but is generally perceived to have been forced into a U-turn in the interests of propping up the wider economy.

The sheer scale of the debacle in the world of banking and 'securitisation' has still fully to be appreciated, although the International Monetary Fund has done its best by describing this as 'the largest financial shock since the Great Depression'.

It used to be fundamental to banking and good business practice to pay attention to the balance sheet. On the whole it was a good idea if you knew what things were worth and they added up. Then a generation of financial whizz-kids decided they could lend a lot more and earn bigger bonuses if they expanded 'off balance sheet'. Regulators should have smelled a rat. But they didn't until the stench became unbearable. Now there is a new fashion: bankers are going to bone up on banking; and regulators on regulation.

The governor has said of the plan to allow banks to swap mortgage-backed securities nobody wanted to touch for top quality UK Treasury bills (which will, it is hoped, provide them with the liquidity to return to that old-fashioned banking practice of lending money): 'The objective is not to protect the banks but to protect the public from the banks.'

This is a great line, from a public official with a great sense of humour, who also happens to harbour strong feelings about the way the banks have behaved. But the fact of the matter is that, whatever the stated 'objective', the strategy is also designed to protect the banks. It is not enough, of course. The banks are having to raise a lot more share capital, and generally boost those old-fashioned balance sheets.

So the Bank of England is providing liquid assets for the collateral of these mortgage-backed 'assets' that have in recent months proved something of a liability. This will oil the wheels of banks that have been reluctant to indulge in routine lending to one another, let alone to the public.

But what about that collateral? It's a lovely word, collateral - from the Latin, and often used, years ago, to describe ancestry , as in 'descended from the same stock, but by a different line'.

More recently the word has often cropped up in the phrase 'collateral damage', to describe the unintended consequences of military action. In financial dealings, of course, collateral is short for collateral security, or 'additional security pledged as guarantee for repayment of money'.

In his worst nightmares Mervyn King must be worried about collateral damage of the non-military sort. Could the largest financial shock since the Great Depression become so intense that what the Bank describes as 'high quality mortgage-backed securities' deliver collateral damage? Well, the whole purpose of the operation, and the tough terms of its administration, is to avoid such damage. The Bank tells us - this is where the contrast with the treatment of those 5.3 million people initially made worse off by the Budget is so potent - 'Given its scale, the [liquidity] scheme is indemnified by the Treasury, but is designed to avoid the public sector taking on the risk of potential losses'. Let us keep our fingers crossed.

In fact, there would have to be one hell of a collapse in house prices to inflict serious collateral damage. As Charles Bean, chief economist of the Bank of England, pointed out in a recent speech: 'Only 5 per cent of mortgagors have less than 20 per cent equity in their home.'

Bean was speaking in the context of the possible impact of falling house prices on consumer spending. He apportioned less weight to the impact of developments in the housing market on consumer spending than to 'the general lack of funds' for lenders to advance against the collateral of 'housing wealth'. Then there is the impact of the return of 'cost inflation' (higher food and fuel prices) on spending power. Nevertheless, however big the financial shock, our beleaguered Chancellor was going over the top recently in describing this as 'the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression'. (At least so far ...)

I am talking generally, of course. There are expanding pockets of real hardship, as my colleague Ruth Sunderland describes on page 3.

Which brings us back to that 10p tax-rate fiasco, on which Gordon Brown eventually had to give ground to the rebels. With respect, I take issue with those who say nobody spotted the problem a year ago. Frank Field did. So did Ming Campbell. So, if you will forgive me, did this column.
