Whom do you believe? Eddie Stobart or Mervyn King? For years it was almost impossible to drive on Britain's motorways without seeing the name Eddie Stobart or Norbert Dentressangle on what seemed like every other lorry. No doubt this is still the case. But some time ago I decided enough was enough with most of our motorways, and I had almost forgotten about Eddie Stobart until the firm's chief executive, Andrew Tinkler, said last week that he hadn't seen any signs of a UK recession 'and neither have our customers, who are hitting their targets'.

Now, let us be clear: neither the Bank of England nor its governor, Mervyn King, has forecast a recession; they have raised the possibility, which has received lots of publicity, but it is not their 'central forecast' - which means they are not staking their reputations on it. However, they are forecasting sub-normal economic expansion and abysmally low growth in 'real take-home pay' - that is, pay after allowing for inflation. They refer to the average for the economy as a whole, not to the bonuses of the City whizz-kids who have done more damage to the reputation of modern capitalism than the entire European left put together. 

Now, there are time-lags in the economy, and the fact that Eddie Stobart has not seen any signs of a recession does not mean there won't be one. It takes time for economic shocks to have an impact: but there is enough out there - higher prices for energy and food (and for imports generally as a result of the devaluation of the pound), difficult credit conditions, falling house prices - to cause concern. And, although the government has dressed up its panicky increase in personal tax allowances as a Keynesian measure to boost the economy, the Bank's concerns about missing the inflation target mean there will be precious little help from monetary policy in the near future - unless, that is, the economic roof falls in. 

Indeed, the Governor has hinted that, given the proximity of government debt and borrowing to the government's self-imposed targets, there might even have to be offsetting measures to compensate for a manoeuvre that only creates a small boost to demand, for one year - and that still does not compensate all the losers from Gordon Brown's extraordinarily misconceived 2007 Budget. Those who qualify for compensation qualify for one year only, whereas the 2p tax cut is as permanent as these things can be. 

Incidentally, it does the Prime Minister and his entourage no credit to blame the recent fiasco on the present Chancellor. It was that too-clever-by-half Budget of 2007 that caused the trouble, and it is noteworthy that Jonathan Baume, representing the higher echelons of the civil service, said last week: 'To be blunt, if ministers are facing difficulties, they have only themselves to blame.' 

As Nicholas Timmins of the Financial Times says, the Cabinet Secretary, Sir Gus O'Donnell, had made it clear that 'the consequences of abolishing the 10p tax band and other controversial tax decisions would have been spelt out to ministers'.

It was Timmins who reported that O'Donnell's predecessor, Lord Turnbull, had compared Brown to Stalin. Since one of the principal criticisms of Brown is that he is indecisive, perhaps Turnbull is now revising his opinion. Who knows? When Brown as Chancellor was accused of keeping things from Tony Blair, perhaps sometimes there was nothing to keep - he might not have made up his mind.

Well, this column has always been the friend of the underdog, and, my goodness, the Prime Minister is the underdog now. My former colleague Robert Harris asked pointedly last week: 'What is this thing called the Labour party for, exactly? ... this friend of global corporations, this ally of the neocons in Washington, this raiser of income tax on the poor...'. 

New Labour was the creation of Brown and Blair, with Peter Mandelson as make-up artiste. As Harris points out, Blair has jumped ship. So most of the wrath, in what many see as terminal decline, falls upon Brown, of whom it cannot be written 'with one bound he was free'. As for Blair, the great fantasist, with one bound he was free - and, as he accumulates his millions, his attitude is almost certainly: 'I'm all right, Gordon.'

For those of us who think New Labour was pusillanimous when it had its chance, the constraints now look ominous. Conscious of history, it did not wish to repeat the mistakes of the 1970s. But here we are with an oil crisis that may, in the long term, force the world to rediscover energy conservation but which, in the short term, imposes a major constraint on economic policy. 

It was the first oil shock of 1973-74, and the wage-indexation system (known then as 'threshold agreements') that thwarted many of Labour's more ambitious plans in 1974-79. The fourfold rise in oil prices in the past four years was not envisaged when Brown gave the monetary policy committee the task of trying to keep inflation down to 2.5 per cent (revised to 2 per cent when the target index was changed). At the time, I pointed out that the target was ambitious, and lower than most of the annual inflation out-turns since 1945. 

Now life is much more difficult for the MPC, although it is already planning to tolerate a higher inflation figure than the target for some time to come. But only up to a point. This means that, unlike in the US, economic policy is not geared to pulling out the stops. However, the inflation threat is nowhere near what it was in the 1970s, and something may yet have to give on the economic policy front.
