The Scottish poet Robert Burns died long before Old Labour, let alone New Labour, was even thought of. But he knew a thing or two.

The Labour Party was out of office for so long during the Eighties and Nineties that it lost all confidence and became pathetically defensive. The loss of the 1992 General Election, during a recession, was the last straw, not least because John Smith, in his shadow Budget, had been honest about his 'tax and spend' plans. That, it was concluded, was the problem. 

After that a tangled web was woven, whereby outsmarting the Tories became the supreme objective. With a majority of almost 180 in 1997, the new government behaved as though it were on the kind of electoral knife-edge that had bedevilled both the Attlee and the Wilson governments before it. 

The local elections of 1 May this year, 11 years after Blair's triumphant arrival in Downing Street, have delivered a damning verdict not just on Gordon Brown's brief and unhappy premiership, but also on the accumulated consequences of 10 years of the Blair-Brown duumvirate - for, as Professor Peter Clarke reminded us last week in the Financial Times, 'the extraordinary bargain between them [Blair and Brown], sealed years ago, turned not so much on a promise to hand over the keys of Number 10 at some indeterminate date as on a pledge to hand over real power to Number 11 from the word go.'

A great deal of attention has been paid to the nationwide swing against Labour, leading the psephologists to conclude that the Conservatives are once again 'electable'. 

In a television interview, the Prime Minister said that what people were most worried about was the price of petrol and food, and the level of utility bills, adding: 'They are worried about their standard of living; there is an uncertainty about the economy.'

He can say that again. There is plenty of uncertainty on the monetary policy committee, where some members are worried about inflation, some about the prospects for output and employment, and one about the possibility of a housing 'meltdown'. (The Bank thought the financial markets came pretty close to meltdown in March.)

But there seems little doubt that what people were also worried about was Brown's leadership. While the victory of Alexander ('Boris') Johnson in London has attracted huge interest, the really interesting thing was the contrast between Labour's vote in the country and Ken Livingstone's feat in winning the support of 47 per cent of the London vote. If he hadn't alienated the Jewish vote with certain remarks, he would have got even closer. And if Labour hadn't made itself so unpopular he would have won, although Livingstone magnanimously forbore to say so. 

But let's face it: although the general state of the economy, and New Labour's inevitable failure to abolish 'boom and bust', were important factors, the big complaint on the doorsteps - the issue that refuses to lie down - is the fiasco of the abolition of the 10p tax rate. 

Last week I pointed out how Robert Chote, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, had played a prominent role in this matter. Chote's life as economics editor of the Financial Times during the first two years of New Labour was made difficult by the Brown camp, but Chote has asked me to point out that the Fleet Street legend about his departure from that post is wrong: the FT was firmly supportive of him, and he eventually left of his own accord. At the IFS he is not taking revenge, but offering dispassionate analysis. Nevertheless, it is interesting the way things have turned out. 

The 10p tax fiasco has assumed such political importance that it is worth recapping. I thought the 2007 Budget was a disaster at the time, and said so. The tragedy was that a Chancellor who had devoted 10 years to helping the poor via 'redistribution by stealth' (the reaction to Smith's shadow budget) should have decided to penalise 5.3 million relatively low-income households in order to outsmart the Tories. 

In evidence to the Treasury committee after the 2007 Budget, Chote said (on 26 March 2007), 'you probably have about 5.3 million families losing in total'. On 28 March, when Treasury officials testified to the committee, Mark Neale, the Treasury's expert on 'tax and welfare', was questioned about this by Michael Fallon (Con, Sevenoaks). He replied: 'I think the figure that Robert Chote gave you is in the right ballpark and is consistent with the Chancellor's statement that four out of five households either gain or remain in the same position ...' Under further close questioning Neale acquitted himself well, in the best civil service tradition; but he does not appear to have been acquitted by the Chancellor. 

The committee had some fun and games when Gordon Brown appeared before them, with some officials, the next day (29 March). Fallon said: 'Chancellor, your welfare reform director, Mark Neale, who confirmed to us yesterday that 5.3 million families would lose out from this Budget, was listed to appear with you this morning but seems to have been purged. Can you reassure us that he is OK?'

The abolition of the 10p rate enabled Brown to lower the basic rate. He boasted: 'If I may say so, it was a dream of every Conservative Chancellor of the Exchequer that they could reduce the basic rate of income tax to 20 pence.' 

He has done it. He now lives with the consequences.
