Change at Crewe!' How the old British Rail instruction comes back to one! Crewe and Clapham were the great railway junctions about which every British schoolperson learnt while their parents were talking about brief encounters at another railway junction. Now the Crewe by-election signals all change in British politics - or does it? 

First, let us say that one hopes, for the good of our political system, that, to use a favourite New Labour phrase, 'lessons have been learnt'.

The 'anti-toff' campaign conducted by New Labour in Crewe was ill-judged at several levels. Not only had Tony Blair's party acquiesced in the growth of the celebrity culture of the past decade, but its minimal and all too surreptitious efforts to counter the historical trend towards widening social inequality were part and parcel of the widespread acceptance of the Thatcherite deception that all can win prizes in a fiercely competitive world. And Mrs Thatcher just loved 'toffs'.

Thus, here we are some 44 years after the premiership of Sir Alec Douglas-Home and, as the historian David Kynaston recently pointed out on the Today programme, the British electorate seems to see David Cameron as 'officer class' and quite likes the idea. 

The epitome of New Labour's misjudgment at Crewe was to have a go at the Bentleys driven by toffs - only to discover that the headquarters of Bentley Motors was in, well, Crewe - a little matter of jobs: jobs not for the boys, but for the electors of Crewe. 

Yes, the Labour campaign got derailed, to coin a phrase, up the junction. And you would never have thought, to judge from the way the late Gwyneth Dunwoody's daughter was chosen as the Labour candidate, that the Labour party had once resorted to very unseemly methods to try to disrupt the career of her 'awkward squad' mother. (Only the desire to avoid a libel action prevents me from saying more.) 

Bentley Motors is now German-owned. This in itself is symbolic of the difference between the myth and the reality of the success of 11 years of Thatcherism, seven years of Thatcherism diluted by Majorism, and 11 years of Thatcherism/ Majorism diluted (up to a point) by New Labour. 

Lectures to the Germans on how to run an economy were always ill-advised, and by trimming and updating their 'old economy' (good, solid manufacturing industry), the Germans have done well, despite the enormous costs of unification. However, things will be tougher from now on. German economic policy is to a large extent determined by the European Central Bank, whose president Jean-Claude Trichet has made it clear that he does not wish to see policy-makers reproduce the mistakes of the 1970s in response to this latest 'oil shock'. In company with former Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker, Trichet is of the view that, in a vain effort to maintain their standard of living in the face of higher oil prices (a shift in the terms of trade), Western economies mistakenly indulged in inflationary policies in the mid-1970s, which led inexorably to the deflationary policies that brought the high unemployment of the early 1980s. 

Here at home, the majority of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee seems now to be close to the Trichet/Volcker view of the importance of not letting inflationary expectations get out of hand. So the kind of economic concerns that affected sentiment in the recent local elections and the Crewe by-election are not going to disappear in a hurry, which is bad news for Gordon 'Stability' Brown. 

It is unfortunate that the squeeze on standards of living brought about by the current 'oil shock' should coincide with the 'bust' phase of a classic business cycle, not to say with the financial system's attempt to come down to earth. Things are rough out there, although we should never forget, to coin another phrase, that most of us have never had it so good. 

The advanced industrial world, however, now feels threatened by 'globalisation' and by the growth of India, China and others - development that the West officially encouraged. 

Economists such as Lawrence Summers of Harvard, while still believing in the principles of free trade and globalisation, are taking the protectionist backlash seriously. They recognise that there are many losers from this process, and that compensation may be needed to turn the tide of protectionism. 

Summers is expressing his concerns at a time when all the emphasis from big business is on lower corporate taxation. But this very 'race to the bottom' goes against the grain of the need for a more progressive tax system to compensate the losers from globalisation. 

This ought to be a campaign for Gordon Brown if he can emerge from his present troubles and rediscover his moral compass. It was ironic that the fiasco over the 10p tax band involved hurting the poor, but the public reaction may prove to have been healthy in the long run. It is remarkable to recall that when Sir Geoffrey Howe abolished the 'lower rate band' in 1980, that lower rate was 25 per cent - higher than the present 20p basic rate !

Incidentally, while the Prime Minister was agonising in No 10 last week on the eve of the Crewe by-election, Lord Stern, he of the seminal The Economics of Climate Change: the Stern review, was receiving a prestigious award across the road in the Whitehall Banqueting House, from the world's largest environmental corporation, CH2M Hill. It was generally thought that Lord Stern had been sidelined at the Treasury by Brown. Some sideline!
