Gordon Brown's proposal to bring back hanging will take many people by surprise. Sorry, that is a joke in really bad taste, and I withdraw it immediately. Nor, while we are on the subject of disappointment, have I yet found any empirical evidence (of the kind we old-fashioned journalists go in for) for the rumour that the latest playground chant is: 'Gordon Brown has let us down.' 

What I have found in my researches is that there are many people in high places who have no particular reason to be thankful to the Prime Minister (sometimes it is a case of 'on the contrary') who are nevertheless sad on his behalf, not to say from the viewpoint of the country at large, that it all seems to be going so horribly wrong. 

Even his most bitter enemies, and he has made quite a few, recognise that he is a man of deep conviction whose driving political passion has been to help the poor and the disadvantaged. All the Brownian economic and political stratagems outlined in these pages over recent years have in the end been motivated by the desire of our longest serving Chancellor since the Napoleonic Wars, and our Prime Minister of less than a year, to do good, and to enable people who did not have the chances he himself had 'to fulfil their potential'.

For instance, the point of granting the Bank of England operational independence was to ensure that this Labour government would not be derailed by the financial crises of the past, but would be able to be as 'socialist' as possible in a Thatcherite and Murdochian world. Unfortunately, there is a danger that Brown's government may be derailed by the financial crises of the present. Unfortunately, also, by being too clever by half - and, I fear, possibly by suffering from a degree of what is vulgarly called paranoia - the Prime Minister has already taken a wrong turning at the political junction, so that the rails on which he is now travelling have not been maintained in the best interests of those vulnerable to derailment. 

It is extraordinary that Brown should have invested so much political capital in the plan to extend pre-charge detention to 42 days - an arbitrary figure reminiscent of the way that the number 42 was decreed to be the secret of the universe in Douglas Adams's The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. It reminds me of the time I once played on the same side as Douglas Adams in a cricket match, and the great cricket-lover insisted on bowling, although he was suffering from a severe back problem. Everybody on the field was embarrassed for the renowned author as he bowled to square leg. 

Why does Gordon Brown insist on bowling to square leg ? 

One does not have to champion the right of terrorists to blow us up to be bemused by the 42-day affair. And, the more one thinks about it, the more one fears that the fiasco of the removal of the 10p tax band was Brown's 'poll tax'. What, you may say? Surely the madness of the poll tax was conceived after Mrs Thatcher (I prefer to call her Mrs: the Lady was not meant to be for turning) had been in office for over 10 years, by which time it begins to get to them? Yes, but the point is that under the highly unusual deal between Tony Blair and Brown way back in 1994 (I prefer to call it the Granita Agreement, even if Cherie Booth is right and it was all done in her sister's house) Blair and Brown became a duumvirate. Brown was not only Chancellor but, with due respect to John Prescott, the de facto Deputy Prime Minister for all those years. He has not just been there for a year. 

In his book, A Stranger in Europe (OUP) Sir Stephen Wall, a distinguished civil servant who worked closely with a succession of foreign secretaries, as well as with prime ministers John Major and Tony Blair, notes that although 'sheer stamina is the first quality that marks out successful politicians from lesser mortals' and although 'they are helped by a huge drip-feed of adrenalin, a potent and addictive drug' the problem is that while adrenalin masks fatigue 'one of its side effects can be hubris ... Fatigue and adrenalin can also produce bad judgments and the effects of such extreme fatigue are cumulative. That is one reason why governments do not just run out of ideas, they run out of steam.'

Now, it may be that Gordon Brown - a historian! - is mindful of the 19th century and of how Disraeli and Gladstone kept bouncing back and seemed to go on for ever. Those of us who did better investing in New Approach for the Derby than in Brown for Prime Minister can only wonder.

Which brings us back to those rails - not the ones at Tattenham Corner, but the economic and financial rails that lie ahead. All the signals point to leaves on the line. We really are experiencing an 'oil shock'. The credit crunch has not gone away. As Professor Willem Buiter, a former member of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee, quipped to the annual conference of the Society of Business Economists last week: 'Libor [the London inter-bank offered rate] is the rate at which banks don't lend to one another.' 

Real incomes are being squeezed; the housing crisis shows no signs of disappearing. As Sir Alan Budd, another former MPC member, said last week: 'There is no case ... for following the European Central Bank in its signalled intention of raising interest rates.'
