There used to be few greater compliments in Britain than to describe a business or a government department as 'a Rolls-Royce machine'. That was how things were meant to work.

These days, Rolls-Royce not only manufactures all those aircraft engines, but also, thanks to modern technology, including satellites, actually monitors them while they are in the air, ready to alert engineers about requirements for maintenance when the aircraft lands. 

People often used to refer to Whitehall as a Rolls-Royce machine. But when our leaders are indecisive, the machine runs into trouble. And there is not much that Rolls-Royce engineers back in Derby can do to help. 

The latest example of grit in the works relates to the process of appointments to the Bank of England. The Financial Times reported last week that Alistair Darling and Mervyn King were squaring up for a clash over who should succeed Rachel Lomax when she retires as deputy governor this month. According to the FT, after the travails with Northern Rock, the Chancellor wanted a market expert such as Paul Tucker, a career Bank official, to succeed Lomax, whereas the governor was 'fighting [a] rearguard action' in favour of Charles Bean, currently the Bank's chief economist.

Then, hey presto, a couple of days later the story had moved on: the Treasury would be happy with the elevation of Bean, but to strengthen the 'financial stability' side there would be 'a panel of eminent City figures' to alert the Bank to potential 'Northern Rocks'. The Chancellor told the Commons: 'We should learn from the example of the Monetary Policy Committee.' 

That seems a strange analogy. What is envisaged? A monthly meeting after which it is announced that the Bank of Dubious Loans is unsound or that the Subsidence Building Society has been nationalised? City poachers whose great financial judgment brought us the credit crunch turning into gamekeepers? We should be told!

Certainly, it is ridiculous that this public dispute should suddenly have erupted within a few weeks of Lomax's departure. This problem was entirely predictable. It was known for ages that her term was coming to an end and that she did not wish to be reappointed. Moreover, with no disrespect to the individuals involved, it did not seem sensible, way back in 1998, to retain the innovation of having two deputy governors when the raison d'être for a second deputy [banking supervision] was hived off to the Financial Services Authority. Again, with no disrespect, it seemed odd to end up with two deputy governors from Whitehall, Lomax and Sir John Gieve, neither with vast experience of the City. 

The Lomax job, in addition to involving a heavy load of administration, is, from the policy point of view, concerned with monetary stability, while it is Gieve who is responsible for financial stability (relations with the FSA, the regulator responsible for the supervision of banks and other financial institutions). Precise areas of responsibility between the Treasury, the Bank and the FSA are still being bargained over in the wake of the Northern Rock affair, and the Conservatives are losing no opportunity to stir the pot of discontent. 

Meanwhile, the debate about monetary policy has become - as that character in Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In might have said - 'vairy interesting'. Basically (a popular word these days), one camp is worried about inflation and the other about the possibility of a disaster arising from a collapse in the housing market. The worriers about inflation want to raise interest rates; some even dismissing the 'credit crunch' as an out-of-date story. The other camp - while not necessarily cavalier about inflation - is concerned that raising interest rates now or soon could really clobber the economy. Some members of this camp want a reduction in interest rates; others, probably the majority, certainly don't want them raised but would 'wait and see' before advocating a cut. 

Within this debate there are two particular areas of discussion: is the rise in cost-push inflation (from higher prices for food, energy and other commodities) likely to set off a 1970s-style burst of wage inflation? And how close is the link between the housing market and consumer spending?

The Bank sees little link between the housing market and consumer spending. This has not always been its view, but it is at present and it is the Bank that calls the shots. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development sees a link, however; so does at least one external member of the MPC, David Blanchflower. So does that veteran City economist Bill Martin, for whose analysis I have always had great respect. I also suspect that the person in the Clapham video shop sees a strong link.

Way back during the economic crisis of 1976, Professor JK Galbraith told Prime Minister James Callaghan: 'This recourse to monetary policy has had highly unsatisfactory results. It affects, in different fashion, those industries such as housing, which depend on borrowed money.'

Personally I cannot begin to compete with the Bank's equations, but my sense is that the almost daily news from the housing market should make it cautious about listening to those urging it to raise rates. 

As for 'second-round effects' on wage demands: unions and employees are in a far weaker position than they were during the energy crises of the 1970s; and the insecurity associated with the credit crunch, the housing scene and rising unemployment is hardly a breeding ground for rip-roaring wage inflation.
