'Because Labour's messed up.' Among the many comments I have read and heard about the government's humiliation at Crewe Junction, this succinct explanation over the airwaves from an anonymous member of the public captured quite a lot. A supplementary, more private comment from a lifelong civil servant also struck me forcibly: 'It has always amazed me how bad politicians are at politics.'

It is possible, just remotely possible, that the government may emerge from this morass. As Gordon Brown's ministerial father no doubt told him: 'With God, all things are possible.' Roger Bootle, a City economist, and I were at Ascot the day before the 1992 election and some bookies were offering 6 to 1 against the Conservatives - who proceeded to win by a distance the following day. 

The search for historical parallels is now intense. At a recent meeting of the All Party Parliamentary History Group it was pointed out that Anthony Eden had learnt the wrong lessons from history ('from Munich to Suez') while 'the present Prime Minister is 'steeped in history' (implying that his history was not doing Gordon Brown much good). To which Professor David Cannadine pointedly replied: 'History is all we have. The point is to avoid simplistic historical comparisons.' 

This was never a problem for George Bush or Tony Blair, whose combined grasp of history was catastrophically jejune (although in recent years they may have learnt something). 

We now have Cherie Blair's contribution to history, which is solipsistic, and subconsciously revealing. Amid all the travails of New Labour in recent weeks, the 14th anniversary of John Smith's death went largely unobserved. What Cherie Booth - sorry, Blair - reveals is that the Blairs had but a passing thought for the tragedy of Smith's death, so swift were they into and out of the starting stalls for the succession. 

It was left to a former member of Smith's staff to write a letter to a newspaper pointing out that many of the good things (such as the minimum wage) for which New Labour is credited in its hour of desperation were the legacy of Smith. 

But let us return to those historical parallels. There is a desperate hope among many Labour supporters that 1992 is the criterion, but this time in Labour's favour: an unpopular government arises like a phoenix from the ashes. There is a more resigned view that the party needs a period in opposition to sort itself out and rediscover its values. To which one is tempted to reply: they had 18 years to sort themselves out between 1979 and 1997, and what's wrong with rediscovering values when one is in a position to do something? 

After all those years in opposition, they came in with the country crying out for them to do something about public-sector services, the transport system and the social divisions that had been deliberately and callously opened up by the Thatcher governments, although mitigated somewhat under John Major (who, alas, after Thatcher had starved British Rail of investment funds, sanctioned that disastrous privatisation). They responded with a two-year freeze on public spending and less public sector investment in 1997-2001 than even the Tories had sanctioned in comparable periods. After the drought came the flood, with all the familiar complaints of waste. Of course many good things have been achieved, but the general impression is one of bitter disappointment. 

New Labour's downfall, quite apart from the familiar internecine warfare, has been the desire to wrong-foot the Conservatives by what political analysts (borrowing from Bill Clinton's presidential tactics) call 'triangulation' but which I prefer to call the attempt to square the circle. There are few better examples of this than the fiasco over the removal of the 10p tax band to finance a 2p tax cut. And, irony of ironies, has any Chancellor in history received less credit for a tax cut than Brown has for what he thought was his 2007 budgetary masterstroke? 

So what about that great New Labour achievement, putting the Bank of England in charge of determining Bank Rate? Well, Brown himself must now be just a little nervous about this; he has been dropping hints about cuts in interest rates, but these have recently gone unheeded by the Bank. The historical comparison that interests the central banks is the 1970s, when, in response to the oil shock of 1973-74 and the subsequent recession, economic policymakers were generally considered to have taken their eye off the ball, and presided over too much inflation. 

The majority on the monetary policy committee, while being in no way of the deflationary inclination of that famous Bank governor Montagu Norman in the inter-war years, is concerned about its counter-inflation credentials. After a good run, it is now finding that the 2 per cent target looks ambitious in the face of the recrudescence of what we used to call 'cost-push' inflation. 

But that is the target, and with people's standard of living under pressure from higher prices of food and fuel, and the higher price of fuel percolating through to other prices, the MPC is not offering much relief. 

The ominous political comparisons may also be with the 1970s. It was the energy crisis that brought down the Heath government of 1970-74 and which, via higher inflation and its discontents, fatally wounded the Callaghan government of 1976-79, Wilson having resigned in 1976. 

Of course, the power cuts of last week revived memories of the first Attlee government of 1945-50. Crisis? What crisis?
