JK Galbraith was fond of telling a story about how President Roosevelt consulted him over a quandary. It was the Thirties, and FDR was due to speak in a town where, several years earlier, he had promised to balance the budget (the federal budget, not the budget of that town). Needless to say, the budget had not been balanced - nothing like! Indeed, the whole point of the macro-economic side of Roosevelt's New Deal policy was to indulge in deficit financing to lift the US economy out of the hole dug during the Great Depression.

Roosevelt asked Galbraith what he should do if the subject came up. He replied: 'Tell them you never said it.' 

This story came to mind when I was reflecting on the odd case concerning the Chancellor, Hansard and the Today programme. Last week I complained in passing that standards were falling at Hansard (the official report on Parliamentary proceedings) and the Treasury, because apparently Hansard had misreported the Chancellor and the Treasury had failed to correct things. 

The Chancellor was alleged to have said, in reply to a backbencher who had declared that nationalisation of Northern Rock would be a disaster: 'I agree with my Hon. friend.' But it turns out that he was agreeing with a different point. Despite what was suggested on Today, Hansard had not been at fault. Nor had the Treasury. So, unlike Roosevelt, Alistair Darling can honestly say 'I never said it.' 

This is a relief for long-term students of the Treasury, which has enough on its hands at the moment, including the preparation of next week's Budget. The official Treasury almost certainly wishes it had not become so much of a spending department under Gordon Brown's Chancellorship - as that great economics commentator Juvenal once observed, 'Sed quis custodiet ipsos custodes?' (But who shall guard the guards?). 

The Institute for Fiscal Studies has decreed that the government's finances are in such poor shape that taxes should be increased. What? At a time like this, when there is so much talk of recession? What would Roosevelt and Galbraith say? That other independent observer, the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, also has concerns about the state of Alistair Darling's books, but is taking St Augustine's view: tax increases? Not yet, Oh Lord.'

Which brings us to a point a number of people have raised: is the economic situation that bad? Are we talking ourselves into a recession? What about the credit crunch? And all the profits the non-Northern Rock banks seem to be declaring? Among those who doubt the current consensus is David Frost, director-general of the British Chambers of Commerce, who tells me the situation among his members is not as bad as the media, and City commentators, report - especially outside London.

This view accords with Bank of England governor Mervyn King's plea for the media to get out of London and see for themselves that things may not be so bad in the regions on which the Bank's agents regularly report. 

Yet I am not sure that these apparently differing perspectives are entirely irreconcilable. Figures from the Office for National Statistics point conclusively to a slowdown in the economy in the fourth quarter of 2007, especially in domestic demand. They do not point to recession, but if enough businesses and people ('consumers') decide that there is going to be a recession, their defensive actions could certainly lead to one. Also, if the worst fears of the Bank - as adumbrated in a recent speech by deputy governor Rachel Lomax - are realised, then a financial sector drawing in its horns might easily contribute to recessionary pressures. For Lomax there are two key developments: 'financial stress will act as a significant drag on demand over the next two years' but countercyclical action by the monetary policy committee may be inhibited by 'the renewed build-up in global inflationary pressures, associated with soaring energy and food prices.' 

The chief economist of the International Monetary Fund expects a slowdown in the world economy to calm the panic about food prices; and Lomax appears to regard the current rise in utility charges as not necessarily pointing to an inflationary surge. She says: 'There is essentially nothing the MPC can do about this immediate impact on the inflation rate. But its implication for policy depends on whether people recognise the temporary nature of the pick-up in inflation... If price- and wage-setters do recognise that the imminent pick-up in inflation will be short-lived, then the implications of the spike for monetary policy, and for the necessary balance of demand versus supply, should be limited.' 

It could turn out that, because of their dependence on the financial sector, London and the south east will be more affected by the current slowdown than other parts of the country. The 1980-81 recession was generally considered to hit the north and the midlands more than the south, whereas the south felt it was the centre of the 1990-91 recession. 

Now, I am not trying to 'talk up' the prospect of another recession (in the sense of a sustained reduction in gross domestic product), but most forecasts, including the Bank's, suggest that the prospect is what economists call a 'growth recession' - output rising below trend, and unemployment going up. Things are potentially worrying, but we are nowhere near the one-third drop in US output between 1929 and 1933 that led (quite rightly) to Roosevelt's failure to balance the budget. 

Nor is inflation as bad as when the word 'stagflation' was coined in the Seventies. I rather like the description I first heard from Richard McGuire of RBC Capital markets: 'Stagflation-Lite.'
