Henry Ford could not have been serious when he declared "History is more or less bunk." But the various complaints over the years that people do not learn enough from history, or are doomed to repeat previous errors, have a lot more to them.

It is a commonplace that in many areas of public life there has been an erosion or disappearance of institutional or collective memory. I have been told many times in the City that financial institutions were replete with young whizz-kids who had never experienced a recession and, worse, thought the good times would go on forever.

In the end, a kind of mania infected the entire financial system, with results that are all around us. A neglected prophet in the wilderness - whose research grant was disgracefully removed from him in the early 1980s - is Professor Wynne Godley, who right from the start persistently warned that "the series of measures that deregulated housing finance and consumer credit" during the 1980s would end in tears. His criticisms were not confined to the Thatcher government. In 2005 he warned that from 1997, under New Labour, a similar factor driving the economy "has again been a rise in personal spending - financed by an unsustainable rise in lending".

This reminds us that although it was "financial engineering" in many arcane forms that precipitated the current crisis, there were all sorts of macroeconomic signals flashing, not least the glut of Asian and Middle Eastern savings that found a temporary home (no pun intended) in the US sub-prime market and elsewhere. Economists everywhere now note that, whereas those savings kept the so-called Anglo-Saxon economies (the US and UK) booming, the problem now is the Keynesian "paradox of thrift" - whereby the big spenders and big borrowers are now over-reacting in the opposite direction. Too much saving is not good for a depressed economy's health. Hence the monetary and fiscal packages being proposed to prevent a continuation of what has seemed like a freefall in so many economies.

Quantitative easing - vulgarly known as "printing money" - is part of the process of trying to counteract the threat of depression . It is a new name for a process in all the basic economic textbooks, whereby if it wishes to expand the money supply and liquidity in the economy, the central bank buys securities and increases the liquidity of the banking system, and if it wishes to contract or slow down monetary growth it sells securities. What is really new is the scale and fanfare attached to this operation.

There is a wealth of literature on the relationship between the supply of money and the demand for it, with which I do not intend to bore readers on a Sunday. But what essentially oils the wheels of a capitalist economy is the mechanism for supplying credit, and it is that mechanism which is now in intensive care, with citizenry understandably baffled as to why hundreds of billions of public funds should be allocated to the banking system with precious few favourable results so far.

It is not surprising that there has been a revival of interest in the works of Karl Marx, who famously said that capitalism contained the seeds of its own destruction. Ironically, in the end it is governments that have to rush to the rescue of capitalism when it shows signs of failure. The problem at the moment seems to be that governments do not seem to have learnt much from history and appear to be lurching from pillar to post. 

This has led the prestigious European Economic Advisory Group, in its 2009 Report on the European Economy, to declare, rather ominously, that "there is even the possibility that large interventions paradoxically exacerbate the fall in consumer and business confidence, by conveying the message that the crisis is far worse than expected".

We saw what happened when a big investment bank, Lehman Brothers, was allowed to fail. We have reached the bizarre situation where banks are now not being allowed to fail although they (or most of them) have failed us.

Now, one of the lessons of the Great Depression of the 1930s was, in the words of that great Bank of England economist, the late Christopher Dow, that "the bank failures did indeed have a major effect in accentuating the depression, but quite largely by reducing the amount of bank credit available to business".

At the moment, the nightmare scenario is that banks are not being allowed to fail, at potentially great cost, but the amount of bank credit available to business and consumers is manifestly insufficient. The result is that a classic "bust" - a recession, involving a collapse of demand after an unsustainable boom, is being accentuated by the additional impact of the financial crisis.

In these circumstances there are growing fears about the dangers of protectionism - one of Gordon Brown's themes in Washington last week - in response to which a characteristic reply from a Washington insider was that he was against protectionism, but "we have to look after our own".

Meanwhile, of course, there are those who think that the present crisis may be a blessing in disguise. All I can say is that it seems to be prettily heavily disguised.
