Making Tony Blair the co-chairman of the World Economic Forum here in Davos is one thing. The idea that the Prime Minister who took us into Iraq on false pretences should be President of Europe is quite another.

Although this was not shouted loudly in the British press, Blair is not the only candidate for the presidency that Nicolas Sarkozy has mentioned. And, mercifully, opposition to his candidacy is refreshingly strong on the Continent.

As someone who marvels that Blair is not doing time in the Tower of London for his conduct over Iraq, I have been giving him a wide berth. This is not difficult, because there is no shortage here of the rich and very rich, in whose company the co-architect of New Labour feels most at home.

Yes, the international debt-set are here in force, even if half the time they have been more interested in the financial markets and what is widely regarded as panic by the US Federal Reserve in slashing interest rates.

It is fascinating to witness the variations in the mood of Davos Man, who, a year ago, was laughably optimistic about the general outlook for the world economy, with two notably dissenting voices - New York-based economist Nouriel Roubini, who foresaw the US property and credit crises, and Zhu Min from the Bank of China, who delivered a penetrating analysis of the unsustainability of the financial position of the United States. Otherwise, the general view was that, ably steered by an all-powerful Federal Reserve, the show would go on as before. But as Herb Stein, economic adviser to President Nixon, once observed: 'If something cannot go on forever, it will stop.' The great illusion of a perfect US central bank in rhythmic tandem with those wise financial markets has been rudely shattered.

Another theory seems to have been found wanting: there has been much disillusionment here with the view, popular after the advent of the credit crunch, that the rest of the world had 'decoupled' from the US economy and it was no longer the case that if the US sneezed the rest of the world caught a cold. The weight of opinion here is that the world is still closely interconnected, and that whatever happens to the US economy from now on is bound to have repercussions not only on Europe (which includes the UK), but China and India as well.

The Asian economies are heavily geared to exports. One optimistic theory is that, having kept the US economy going by depositing its surplus savings in New York, China can now change course to consume more. But, as one Chinese delegate observed, they don't have Christmas in China, and are not suddenly going to buy all those toys they produce. The same applies to goods the Asian economies supply to the West: are they just going to stockpile them as demand from the US and other affected advanced industrial economies slows down?

A problem, paradoxically, with the kind of totalitarian capitalism practised in China is that an inadequate welfare system forces people to save for their old age, rather than consume now. 

At all events, it is a truth generally acknowledged here that, at the very least, there has been a sharp slowdown in the US economy, with many believing that America is already in recession. Lawrence Summers of Harvard, a former US Treasury Secretary, says the big question is not whether the US will have a recession 'but what kind of recession, and how severe it will be'. 

Roubini, whose forebodings last year have been borne out, now predicts 'a deep and prolonged decline, perhaps lasting as long as a year.' 

Fred Bergsten, director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, pins his hopes not on 'decoupling' but on 'reverse coupling', with other countries alleviating the US economic woes by buying the exports that the devaluation of the dollar has made more competitive. 

The problem with this is that the sharp rise in US exports in the past year has not been sufficient to counteract the other factors contributing to the current slowdown. One observer here quipped that 'reverse coupling' constitutes the Kama Sutra approach to macro-economics.

Which brings us to macro-economic policy. The Fed has been criticised for panicking with its interest-rate cut last week. But my mind goes back to a seminar last autumn, when a senior Reserve source was asked a two-part question: was the Fed going to cut interest rates and was there going to be a recession in 2008? To which the source replied: 'That's the same question!'.

Some observers criticise the Fed for caving in after the sharp decline in the markets last week. They also worry, if you please, about the next 'bubble' - when the Fed, with its cut in interest rates, and the US administration, with its proposed fiscal package, are trying to alleviate what they presumably fear could be a serious recession.

It is interesting that, for all the US belief in free enterprise and markets and hostility to 'big government', the 'can-do' spirit triumphs in an emergency and the stops are pulled out to minimise the impact of previous mistakes - whether they be mistakes of economic policy or those caused by imaginative 'financial engineering' and dubious loan practices.

The governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, and the president of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude Trichet, are generally perceived to be adopting a more hawkish stance. But there is every chance that if the US recession turns out to be severe, and if its worldwide impact eases inflationary pressures, then the Bank of England, and even the European Central Bank, will respond appropriately.
