For various reasons I am not planning to participate in the Beijing Olympics. Even if I were qualified - and there comes a time in a man's life when he has to face reality - there is the not inconsiderable problem of the Chinese approach to human rights. Then there is my belief, as a former student of Greek, Latin and ancient history, that the Olympics should have a permanent base in Greece. 

Be that as it may: China is big news these days, and an outbreak of inflation in the Chinese economy has combined with higher prices of food, oil and other commodities, not to say a devalued pound, to raise what are known as 'inflation expectations' in this country. This makes life difficult for the governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, and his eight colleagues on the monetary policy committee - not to say for the rest of us. 

It was thus with - how shall I put it? - great expectations that I turned up at the governor's press conference on the Bank of England's latest inflation report last Wednesday. I wondered what he would make of the dilemma facing him: an economy that was manifestly slowing down, and might well be on the verge of recession, yet concerns about the kind of inflation that might in theory prevent the Bank from taking action to attempt to ward off recession. 

Now, for reasons not unconnected with my lack of qualifications for the Olympics, I sometimes arrive late for the governor's press conference. On this occasion, however, I got there in good time. Good enough time to be able to stand and stare - before going through 'security' - at a sign announcing that, if qualified and so inclined, one could borrow at Bank Rate of 5.25 per cent or buy a gold bar for £189,040. 

Given the general panic in the banking system, I must say that I contemplated the joys of being able to own a gold bar. Unfortunately I did not have £189,040 on me, so I proceeded to the press conference. There was a minute to go, and what struck me was the sepulchral silence that accompanied the run-up and arrival of the monetary policy committee team. My colleagues were plainly expecting the worst. 

I sensed a certain ambivalence. Thus, on the basis of what the governor said, the Financial Times felt able to proclaim: 'Economic outlook is bleak, says King'. Yet, while warning of tough times, the governor had gone out of his way to urge the media, in turn, to go out of their way - namely to put the doom and gloom of the City and the London property market behind them for a while and to visit the provinces, where the mood was not so depressed. 

However, I think the governor may have been trying to convince himself. His opening words had been unambiguous: 'Two key developments shape the MPC's latest projections. First, tighter credit conditions for households and businesses will bear down on demand both in the United Kingdom and abroad. Second, rising energy, food and import prices will push on inflation.'

Until the publication of the latest inflation report, the financial markets had been expecting a whole series of cuts in interest rates. But last Wednesday the Bank made clear that such a prospect was not compatible with its statutory duty to aim at an inflation rate of 2 per cent. In a useful insight into the MPC's pragmatic approach, King (hawk or no) said it would be perfectly possibly to bring inflation back to target, but 'we're not going to do that in the next few months' because to do that would require 'a massive rise in interest rates'.

So the Bank is taking a longer view: it wants a 'rebalancing' of the economy. Therefore it has no problem with a slowdown in consumer spending, with the bursting of the bubble of property prices, or with a squeezing of 'real' (inflation-adjusted) incomes. 

Indeed, the governor was remarkably relaxed about the fall in the pound - not least on account of the resultant boost to the competitiveness of our exporters (always assuming we have enough exporters left to take advantage of the situation). 

As the governor's dismissal of 'a massive rise in interest rates' indicates, the MPC does not want the rebalancing to be overdone. Indeed, the markets, while getting the message about the MPC's worries on the inflation front (King said that the inflation risk 'gives us most concern'), rightly deduced that the Bank does not wish to see domestic demand completely clobbered. One or two further reductions in Bank Rate are still expected, but not to the extent of what has happened in the US. 

Inevitably, in these circumstances, we have seen a revival of the ugly 1970s neologism 'stagflation' to describe a situation where inflation and economic stagnation (or slowdown, or even recession) coincide. But recent references to 'steep' rises in the rate of inflation indicate a certain lack of historical perspective. The 'stagflation' of the mid-1970s brought the annual inflation figure in the UK to 26 per cent at one point. 

Which reminds me: all these references to 'factory gate prices' go back to the 1970s, when your correspondent coined the expression 'prices at the factory gate' to distinguish wholesale prices from retail prices. There must be young newspaper readers out there who wonder why the prices of factory gates are so important...

Finally, and back to the Chinese: Charlie McCreevy, the European Union competition commissioner, recently pointed out to the annual dinner of the Society of Business Economists that, whereas last year 'sovereign wealth funds' (on the lines of those run by the People's Republic ) were considered villains, this year they are welcomed as the saviours of Western capitalism. 

It's a funny old world.
