Tom Stoppard had great fun with the goings-on in parliamentary committee rooms when he wrote his one-act political satire Dirty Linen. But that was some years ago. The state of play between our major political parties surely demands a revisit by Sir Tom to the scene of the crime. After all, there is much theft taking place, under a government that is supposed to be reducing crime. 

The origins of the current crime-wave in Westminster can be traced to the time that Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, accused Tony Blair of stealing his (Brown's) '[expletive deleted] budget'. Do you remember Tony Blair? He was Prime Minister of this country for 10 years, and already schoolchildren are being asked about him in history lessons (a subject, alas, on which Blair himself was not too hot). 

Blair had publicly committed his government to reaching European standards of health care. This naturally absorbed the lion's share of future budgets, and it is an open question whether it has been a success. What is not an open question is the degree to which it inhibited spending in other areas, notably the armed forces, with whom Blair was so keen to involve in questionable foreign quarrels. 

However, Brown himself was no slouch at stealing the clothes of others. His early Budgets came straight from Conservative Central Office (renamed Conservative Campaign Headquarters) with acceptance of a planned two-year public spending freeze that Kenneth Clarke (Chancellor 1993-97) had no intention of implementing. 

More recently, in the chaos surrounding the non-election of autumn 2007, Brown and his successor as Chancellor, Alistair Darling, stole most of the Conservative Party's inheritance tax clothes. The Cameron-Osborne concessions on inheritance tax were to be paid for by - guess what - a tax on those now famous 'non-doms'. Yes, the Labour Party's chin is sticking out, receiving all the blows for this proposed tax - blows emanating from lobbies that are probably Conservative to a woman, yet it was a Conservative policy that New Labour stole. 

Given the controversy stirred up by this issue, one wonders whether the entire idea was not a clever wheeze dreamt up in Conservative Central Office - sorry, Campaign HQ. 

Which brings us to this week's Budget. Most people think this will be Alistair Darling's first Budget. It would, however, be more appropriate to regard it as Gordon Brown's last, because the big item for the history books and, more immediately, for people's pockets, in the financial year 2008-09 will be a 2p cut in the basic rate of income tax. This was announced well in advance by Brown last year, and was a very Conservative move. In this case we saw theft of Conservative clothing even before the Tories had had a chance to put it on display. 

This tax cut will come as some relief to the public, as (on average) people experience a sharp reduction in the growth of what economists call 'real take-home pay' (the 'real' referring to purchasing power after inflation).

Now there has been much discussion lately about the sad state of the government's finances (although recent figures indicate that the budget deficit is not quite as disturbing as it was a few months ago). The government would have been in a happier position if it had grasped the nettle and raised the top rate of tax way back in 1997, but it was too pusillanimous. So central and local government court unpopularity by scraping the barrel and annoying not only the rich and the non-doms, but the average citizen who can hardly take his or her car out on to the road without committing some putative offence and being fined £120, or £30 more than the basic state pension for a week. 

At the macro-economic level there has been much discussion, given the state of the public finances, about whether the overall level of taxation should be increased this week. 

There are precedents for increasing taxation during an economic slowdown or recession. Sir Geoffrey Howe increased taxes in his 1981 Budget, as did Norman Lamont in 1993; and Lamont's successor Kenneth Clarke kept a tight rein on the finances as well. But in 1981 monetary policy was relaxed (with a determined effort to lower the exchange rate) and even so unemployment went on rising until 1986. Under Lamont there was a sharp reduction in interest rates and the exchange rate after Black Wednesday, and the economy benefited from relatively low interest rates and a very low exchange rate during the first few years of Clarke's chancellorship. These factors counteracted the effect of fiscal tightening. Indeed, New Labour inherited a strongly growing economy in 1997. 

Now, we have recently - at last! - experienced another devaluation of the pound. This must be contributing to the better (or less gloomy) reports coming - despite the credit crunch - from, for example, the engineering industry. Nevertheless, if I were advising the Chancellor, I should be reluctant to choose this moment for a tightening of fiscal policy. There are just too many uncertainties out there. 

For instance: we have individual members of the Bank of England's monetary policy committee seemingly split in two: one half of them wishes to raise interest rates to control inflation; the other wishes to lower them to avoid a recession - the obvious worry being that, with real take-home pay under pressure, and the bursting of the credit bubble, things could get quite nasty. 

The practice of relying on one single instrument - the interest rate - to run economic policy may have had its day.
