In his superb memoirs, my old friend Nigel Lawson expressed surprise that, at a time when the Bank of England did not have operational responsibility for monetary policy, but was in charge of banking supervision, the best Bank people (in his view) were attracted to monetary policy, not supervision. 

He was reflecting on the collapse of Johnson Matthey Bankers in 1984, when he was Chancellor. In The View From No. 11 Lawson provides an enthralling account of that crisis, and of how he resolved to strengthen banking supervision. It was therefore interesting to wake up last Thursday morning to the sound of Lawson making some characteristically stringent points about the Northern Rock fiasco, now in its sixth record-breaking month and playing to - well, perhaps in the circumstances it would not be in the best of taste to refer to packed houses.

As he noted, the quality of banking supervision has weakened since his reforms of the 1980s. Lawson was cautious about the reform of building societies, emphasising that under the 1986 Act 'they still had to raise the bulk of their funds from retail deposits'. That was before the demutualisation of building societies, a process that at least contributed to what is euphemistically known as the 'Northern Rock business model' ('with extra Granite').

It was William Ewart Gladstone (for younger readers, Chancellor and Prime Minister even before my time) who opined: 'Finance is, as it were, the stomach of the country, from which all the other organs take their tone'. And it was Churchill (Chancellor in the 1920s, well before his wartime premiership) who expressed the desire for 'finance' to be 'less proud and industry more content'.

At a time when no newspaper is complete without comparisons and contrasts between the Black Wednesday crisis that did so much damage to the Conservatives in 1992 and the Northern Rock affair, it is interesting to reflect on how New Labour got itself into this position. For, even if Messrs Cameron and Osborne can be criticised for failing to put the boot in after the announcement of the nationalisation of Northern Rock (or the semi-nationalisation, because the news about the Granite 'special investment vehicle' indicates that even now there are parts of Northern Rock that nationalisation can't reach), this continues to be a huge crisis for the government. Indeed, one sure echo of Black Wednesday is that the behaviour of the Opposition (Labour was up to its neck in the ERM mire) hardly matters. They just have, as it were, to hang on, while the government - they hope - hangs itself. 

The sad thing from New Labour's point of view is that it has invested so much in 'proud finance'. The curious incident of the pound in the daytime (Black Wednesday, 16 September 1992) involved losses to the official reserves of some £3.3bn. We are blithely told that not all of the 'upwards of £100bn' committed to Northern Rock is in danger - unless the value of every house mortgaged to Northern Rock falls to zero. But, in a semi-nationalised set-up which only makes sense if the Northern Rock operation is 'downsized' during a period when all the news from the financial world is disturbing, it is difficult to believe the bank's executive chairman, non-dom Ron Sandler, is going to conduct this salvage operation at a cost to the taxpayer of less than that incurred on Black Wednesday. 

Another comparison with Black Wednesday is, of course, the relationship between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor. Alistair Darling is being written up (or off) as the classic fall guy, what with the dithering over Northern Rock ('no nationalisation without procrastination'), the chaotic state of plans to tax Sandler and his fellow non-doms, prevarication over changes to capital gains tax, and so on. 

Is Alistair Darling this decade's Norman Lamont? The ERM policy was more John Major's than Lamont's, but that didn't save him. On the other hand, Lamont was eventually fired not because of Black Wednesday but because of other 'accidents'. Most sensible people think that, one way or another, Northern Rock should have been sorted out fast - as Lawson reminds us that Johnson Matthey was. If the dithering was the fault of the Prime Minister, not of the Chancellor, then Darling's position may be less vulnerable than is generally assumed. 

On the subject of the Chancellor's travails, one recalls that the pre-Budget report (once known as the Autumn Statement) was originally meant to be a consultative document; if it produces outcries from the City, so what? Perhaps a compromise may result, based on - well, consultation. But where does consultation end, and fatcat lobbying begin? We should assuredly be told. 

Old Treasury hands laugh, and say all that stuff about consultation was politically correct hogwash. Nevertheless, the Chancellor has an opportunity to save himself here - and it was a good omen for him that he held up well to a sustained attack on the Today programme last week by my friend John Humphrys, which, through no fault of John's, turned out to have been based on an incorrect report in Hansard. 

In the days when Nigel Lawson was Chancellor, the Treasury double-checked Hansard before it was released. Standards, and Hansards, are falling, and need to be restored. Meanwhile, I worry that, although Tony Blair had to go because of Iraq, hopes vested in his successor have not been realised. Is he capable of steering between Northern Rock and a hard place? Or for Gordon Brown, who pushed for so long to be Prime Minister, are the operative words those of his fellow Scot, Robert Louis Stevenson: 'To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive'?
