With that unerring instinct of his for the 'contemporary history' he has made into an academic subject, Professor Peter Hennessy, guest-editing Today last December, assembled a few of us old lags to reminisce about sterling crises we had known. 

Sure enough, since then the pound has hardly stopped falling against the euro. This is not necessarily a crisis for UK industry; the pound has been overvalued for too long from the point of view of the economy's competitiveness vis-à-vis the eurozone. Indeed, the Bank of England welcomes this contribution towards the 'rebalancing' of our economy, from a position where we were (collectively) living beyond our means, and recent business surveys reflect the relief of British industry. 

But it is a mini-crisis for British holidaymakers in continental Europe, where the mental arithmetic is now dangerously close to one to one. (On a recent trip to the French Alps, I found myself deducting a fifth from the price in euros to get the sterling equivalent; for years you could kid yourself that a bill for €150 was 'roughly' £100.)

However, since the chronic overvaluation of the pound has been a theme of this column, one must take the statesmanlike view and grin and bear the personal consequences. But, to coin a phrase, there is a cloud around many a silver lining, even if it is no bigger than a man's hand, and the history of adjustments in the pound's value is that they have a tendency to get out of that hand. Let us hope not on this occasion. 

It is a common complaint these days, both in Whitehall and the City, that there is not enough sense of history, or 'collective memory', around. In which context the recent publication of Prime Ministers and Whitehall 1960-74 (Hambledon Continuum) by Jon Davis of London's Queen Mary College is most welcome, because he has had access to both the official papers surrounding the problems the 1964-70 Wilson governments had with the pound, and to the officials themselves. 

The events leading up to, and after, the 1967 devaluation dominated the economic policy of the 1960s. That was under a Labour government, as was the crisis of 1976 when, having wanted the pound to become more competitive, the government found that the devaluation got completely out of control and Britain had the humiliating experience of having to borrow once again (we had done so in 1967-68) from the International Monetary Fund, an incident that was manna from heaven for one leader of the opposition, named Margaret Thatcher. 

Much has been written about 1976, but last week the definitive inside account of the crisis of the mid-1970s was unveiled within the walls of the Treasury itself. The account, Decline to Fall - The Making of British Macro-Economic Policy and the 1976 IMF Crisis (Oxford University Press), is by no less an authority than Sir Douglas Wass, Permanent Secretary to the Treasury under Denis Healey's chancellorship. 

Decline to Fall is a judiciously chosen title, because early in 1976 the pound declined to fall when some policymakers wanted it to; but when it did, it did so with a vengeance and the crisis later that year made its contribution to the fall of James Callaghan's government. 

A message that emerges strongly from the book is that, while the immediate cause of the crisis was the weakness of the pound, the IMF team, during the often fraught negotiations about conditions for the loan, were very keen that Britain should subsequently preserve a competitive exchange rate. Ironically, we ended up during the late 1970s and the early 1980s with a ridiculously 'strong' exchange rate, which damaged UK industry and caused terrible unemployment. 

Both the present Cabinet Secretary Sir Gus O'Donnell (himself a former Treasury Permanent Secretary) and the present Treasury Permanent Secretary Nicholas Macpherson have a mission to restore a sense of history to Whitehall (and elsewhere) and they encouraged Wass to delve into all the official records that had become available under the 30-year rule. 

It was, therefore, with a mischievous smile on his face that Wass told us at the book launch that he of all people had been responsible in 1976 for the abolition of the Treasury Historical Section. One of his reasons for writing the book was 'guilt... an act of contrition!' As part of the deal with the IMF the Treasury felt that it too should contribute to '2.5 per cent [expenditure] cuts across the board', and the Historical Section happened to account for 2.5 per cent of its expenditure.

At all events, it is not for nothing that some people think this column's fictional character Sir Douglas Corridor is modelled on Wass. Having unveiled his great contribution to economic and constitutional history, he expressed doubts as to whether a sense of history really helped officials and ministers in moments of crisis. I am sure he was teasing, because he went on to explain that study of the collapse of the Ramsay MacDonald government in 1931 helped Healey's resolve to carry the Cabinet at the eleventh hour in 1976. 

Finally, this week's column would not be complete without a tribute to Sir John Harvey-Jones, that great chairman of ICI and 'Troubleshooter', whose memorial service took place in Hereford cathedral last week. 

It was concern about the excessive strength of - guess what? - the pound in the early 1980s that brought Sir John and your correspondent together. He had a great sense of humour. At the end of the service, the Hereford Town Band played 'A Life on the Ocean Wave'. But Sir John spent his wartime naval service under the waves: after being sunk twice, he opted for submarines.
