It was at the London School of Economics, of all places, that the Queen recently asked why nobody had told her and her subjects about the imminence of the financial crisis. "Why did nobody notice it?" she is supposed to have said.

In fact, as I have pointed out, there was ample warning about the unsustainability of the boom in the prices of houses and financial assets and associated financial engineering. There were also strongly voiced concerns about the "imbalance" in the world economy - countries such as the US and Britain living beyond their means; countries such as China and Germany being heavily dependent on exports to those big spenders (and borrowers).

What nobody, to my knowledge, predicted - hence the Queen's very pertinent question - was that the financial system itself would seize up and banks would stop lending to one another. In this world of instant communication but very short memories, it is sometimes forgotten that we had already had a year of financial crisis before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and not everybody at the time knew that the decision not to rescue Lehman Brothers would turn into a rout; why even George Soros was unsure on the night, essentially saying that the aftermath of the Lehman affair might prove catastrophic and might not.

At present most of the focus seems to be on the bad behaviour of many of the bankers, in particular on their bonuses. This is hardly surprising, given the palpable anger of the general public, many of whose very livelihoods - and life savings - are at risk, if not already lost. However, retribution against bankers can only take a sick economy so far. There is a very important debate going on beneath the screaming headlines: it is between what I have previously described as "the kitchen sink" school - which believes that policymakers should throw everything they can at the economy to get it moving again - and those who, even when the world economy shows every sign of spiralling further downwards, are more concerned about budget deficits and the possibility that more inflation lies just around the corner.

The concerns of both schools were neatly joined in Mervyn King's most recent press conference. The governor amiably conceded that "almost everything that we are doing in the very short term looks as if it's diametrically opposite to what we want to do in the medium and longer term".

Pausing for breath, he went on: "And it is. That's the paradox of policy which matches the Keynesian paradox of thrift... Although in the longer term we will need to consolidate the public finances and reduce the scale of issuance of public debt, in the short term, to prevent the downturn from being even greater than it is, we need to transfer some of the private debt onto the public sector balance sheet." The nation would need to save more in the long term, but if the saving rate were to rise now "we'd be in an even deeper recession".

Now, much publicity at the moment is being given to what is widely reported as a new device whereby the Bank will embark on "quantitative easing", an effort to increase the supply of money and credit in the economy. With due respect to those who regard this as a novel approach, I have to say that for a central bank to buy securities in order to put more liquidity into the system is as old as the hills and can be found in every basic economics textbook. The only new thing about this is that the arrangement has to be carefully handled so that it is not in conflict with what the Treasury's debt management office is up to.

This is because when New Labour handed the control of interest rates over to the Bank in 1997, it removed the Bank's responsibility for managing the market in government stock, or "gilts".

But New Labour did something else as well: it took away the Bank's responsibility for banking supervision. I fear that there can be little doubt that recent events have shown the wisdom of that decision in an unfortunate light. It is interesting that the former permanent secretary to the Treasury, Lord Burns, recently told the House of Lords economic affairs committee how unsatisfactory the new arrangements were. "The new system had been set up on the basis of a Treasury instinct that the Bank of England was always too ready to rescue banks," he said, with more than a touch of irony, adding: "I don't think anybody quite anticipated a system where it would be the Bank of England dragging its feet as lender of last resort, and there was a period when I felt possibly the Treasury was not as much in charge of this process as it would have been under the old arrangements."

Someone once told me that the world was divided into two: "Those who blame others, and those who blame themselves." There is plenty of blame flying around at the moment, and there is little doubt that New Labour, having been ridiculously over-praised for its economic policies in the early years, is now getting a lot of stick, much of it deserved.

But this has been, and is, an international crisis, and what stands out a mile is that in inflation targets policymakers thought they had discovered the economic philosopher's stone: but the single instrument of interest rates was not sufficient to curb the boom in asset prices. Congratulations to the retiring deputy governor of the Bank of England, Sir John Gieve, for coming clean in a speech last Thursday - funnily enough, also at the LSE - and confessing that the game is up.
