Recently I received a letter from a lawyer friend who retired from the City some years ago. Entitled "Thoughts of an Old Man on the UK Banking System", it traced the history of what we used to call "joint stock banks". They originated in reaction to the plethora of small "partnership" banks, "which not uncommonly went bust, the customers/depositors losing their money - a familiar scene in many a Victorian novel, the cause being frequently the imaginative use (by the directors/partners) of the customers' deposits ..."

As my friend went on to observe: "What the customers actually needed and wanted were institutions where the customer simply handed over his money and actually got it back when he asked for it". So were born the joint stock banks, known to later generations as the clearing banks, who met the need by, in effect, guaranteeing "no imagination" and "no bright ideas", just "a safe haven for your money".

When my friend worked in the City, and when I first came into financial journalism, clearing banks provided current account facilities; they did not make long-term loans, and certainly did not lend against mortgages, which were the preserve of the building societies and institutions such as life assurance companies. These latter could look at their own books, see they did not need the money back until their own policies matured in (say) 20 years' time, and thus could safely make loans maturing in 20 years' time. Those seeking capital appreciation could use the stockmarket.

I have summarised my friend's analysis, which he modestly calls "oversimplified - yet I cannot help wondering if it did not have some advantages", adding "of course there were risks, but they were identifiable and more or less measurable". The letter ends with "perhaps Virgil got it right when he (nearly) said: 'Beware investment banks bearing bright ideas'."

Well, as I wrote a few weeks ago, in the immortal words of Joseph (Catch 22) Heller, "Something Happened". Something happened with a very long fuse - a fuse lit long ago - winding through the City of London's Big Bang of the mid-1980s; all that fashionable deregulation; the demutualisation of the building societies; and then the repeal, in 1999, of the US Glass-Steagall Act, which had separated the activities of what the public knew as "banks" and the more (eventually very much more) risk-taking institutions euphemistically known as "investment banks" or, for a long time in the UK, until the US financial invasion, "merchant banks".

Glass-Steagall had been passed in 1933 to avoid a repetition of the speculative, leveraged excesses of the 1920s. The scene shifts to recent years and the present day, when the banking crisis has become a daily soap opera in the wake of the sinking of the financial Titanic. As Martin Weale, director of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, observed recently: "People who think they can walk on water should not be surprised when they fall in."

Some analysts are making comparisons with the 1930s, while a new branch of commentary has been founded on the belief that one should not make comparisons with the 1930s. But one minister, Ed Balls, the secretary of state for children, families and schools, has even suggested that the crisis may be even worse, and more protracted, than the 1930s. One detects here a presentational decision by New Labour to shift from claiming that the UK is uniquely placed to weather the storm to a desire to "talk up" the crisis so vociferously that, if worst does not come to the worst, the government may gain some last vestiges of credit.

But is it a good idea to talk up the crisis when those "animal spirits" of businessmen are so low - to say nothing of the mood of the general public? I wonder.

The terrible thing is that Balls may be right. We do not know. But the sheer speed of what has become a "synchronised downturn" in the once-lauded globalised world economy is truly frightening. Industrial production and exports have recently been recording a year-on-year decline in double-digit percentages, and the big fear of those organising the G20 meeting in London in April and the G8 world economic summit in Sardinia in July is the palpable growth of protectionist sentiment around the world.

In his much publicised statement that the British economy was in "deep recession" last week, the governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, warned that "the length and depth of the recession will depend to a significant extent on developments in the rest of the world, where a severe economic downturn has taken hold."

Some bad things come to an end. As King said in January, "time is a great healer, even of banks". But it is disturbing that on both sides of the Atlantic the reaction to the banking crisis has been faltering and piecemeal on the part of governments, which seem too frightened to acknowledge that the best way out of this may be to write off the old system, set up new state banks, and allow a chastened private sector to develop when financial confidence has been restored - a sector that separates old-fashioned banking from outright risk-taking. As for bonuses, I give you the admission by John Mack, chief executive of Morgan Stanley: "We love what we do. If you gave me no bonus in the best of years, I'd still be here."

But back to Joseph Heller: "Something did happen to me somewhere that robbed me of confidence and courage, and left me with a positive dread of everything unknown that might occur." For Heller's narrator, read the globalised financial system.
