This much-publicised meeting of the World Economic Forum was not meant to happen. By this I mean that as recently as two years ago the prevailing mood among what I like to call the international debt set was that a combination of globalisation and free-market economics had brought an era of sustainable, rapid economic growth. 

The problems faced by policymakers were not macroeconomic - after all, central bankers knew how to control inflation and that was all that mattered, was it not? Yes, in the Goldilocks world of low inflation and continual expansion, the real problems concerned the environment, African debt, water shortages, disease and so on.

The Goldilocks metaphor was much used, and abused. It was a reference to a pace of economic activity that was neither too hot nor too cold.

Unfortunately, it turned out that there were far more than three bears out there in the forest. Most of the world now seems to have become bearish about the economy. There had been a handful of vociferous dissenters, even in Davos, who agreed with the famous US economist Herb Stein that "things that can't go on forever, don't". But, vociferous though they were, their voices were drowned by those of the financial masters of the universe. (Yes, gaining the whole world was not enough for them.)

The press and the airwaves are now jam-packed with news about the crisis. It is now generally accepted that this is the worst recession since the 1930s (Alistair Darling was right!) and we face a new phenomenon in economic reporting - some headlines proclaim the increase in unemployment figures for the entire industrialised world. When I first encountered such a headline the other week, it looked for a moment as if an entire British city had been declared redundant overnight.

The official theme of this year's chastened and almost humble World Economic Forum was "Shaping the Post-Crisis World". This rather begs the question that we are anywhere near "post-crisis". I gather that, when drawing up plans in December, the organisers were assuming that the banking crisis would be over and the debate would focus on the threat of deflation and depression. Well, there was certainly a lot of focus on those, but much of the discussion was also about the continued banking crisis and the obvious implications for the scale of the economic horrors now facing the world.

There was an interesting exchange during the main economic debate when Stephen Roach, the Morgan Stanley economist who was so bearish two years ago that he was, in his own words, "dropped" from the panel, challenged the Financial Times's Martin Wolf for suggesting that we now faced a "proto-Depression". Roach preferred the word "recession" and, bear or no bear, could even see a recovery next year - albeit an "anaemic" one.

Which brings us to the second episode in this sorry saga - a saga that brought the Russian president and the Chinese prime minister to Davos to lecture western capitalism on its deficiencies. Depressions on the scale of what scarred a whole generation in the 1930s were supposed never to occur again. Successive generations of economists, whatever their philosophical, doctrinal or methodological differences, took it for granted that that particular threat had been banished.

True, when there were concerns about inflation or the balance of payments, restrictive economic policies would cause the growth of output to slow down, or even fall, and unemployment to rise; and true, as in the UK in the early 1980s, misguided economic policies could overdo the pain. But from 1945 to 2007 there was a functioning banking system. I have quoted Gladstone before, and I shall quote him yet again: "Finance is, as it were, the stomach of the country, from which all the other organs take their tone." 

But, in those other immortal words - this time of Joseph Heller - "something happened". The financial system became a kind of pyramid scheme writ large. Now governments in the US and UK (not Canada) are having to rescue the banks with taxpayers' money, and in France they have taken to the streets.

It is not strictly true, as is often asserted, that the banks are not lending. But they are drawing in their horns; and, to return to Gladstone's metaphor, the other organs of the economy are badly, very badly, afflicted by the financial sector's need for a stomach pump.

As the veteran former central banker and International Monetary Fund official Jacob Frenkel said here in Davos: "In the old days, banks were providers of the liquidity and financial resources. Now they are dependent on obtaining liquidity and resources from the rest of the economy."

To cap it all, with official interest rates close to zero, the limits of monetary policy have been reached. We know it is supposed to operate with "long and variable lags", but this is all taken account of in the IMF's gloomy economic forecast. The Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson has questioned the assumption of Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke that Milton Friedman was right about appropriate monetary policies being the guard against, and cure for, economic depression. What matters is fiscal policy: governments, via increases in public spending and tax cuts (especially for the poor), can ensure that the money is spent.

In which context, the right note, as it were, was struck here by my new friend, our great bass-baritone Bryn Terfel, when, at a Standard & Chartered dinner, he ended a recital with a topical reference to President Obama's $800bn-plus "fiscal stimulus" and proceeded to sing the Gershwins' I've Got Plenty of Nothing and Flanders and Swann's The Gasman Cometh: "It all makes work for the working man to do ... "
