Overall, the French weigh less than Americans and many reasons have been proposed for that difference.
Thus, for example, while Americans treat food as fuel that has to be consumed mostly because it will allow them to get to the next game, meeting, conference, event, or whatever, the French make a meal of every meal.
The eat much more slowly than Americans generally do, they enjoy food for the sake of the food not as fuel, they relish variety, they enjoy freshness, and so on, all of which I think is true.
Another obvious difference to anyone who spends even a few days in France is that the French eat much smaller portions than Americans do, particularly in restaurants, where the servings are often just a fraction of the servings that you get in a typical American restaurant.
True, you might say, but hey, you can still get fat from eating lots of small portions, which is true, of course, so it’s interesting to read about another theory for the weight differences that’s been proposed by researchers from Cornell University.
In a survey that they did on 133 Parisians and 145 Chicagoans, the researchers determined that the French use different cues than Americans to tell themselves when to stop eating.
Thus, while Americans generally eat everything on their plates, no matter how much that is, the French use “internal” cues to tell them when to stop eating, that is, the French stop eating when they feel full while Americans stop eating only when there’s nothing left to eat.
I, for one, can buy that theory but I also believe that you can change your response to food, your attitude to eating, your cue-reading, which is something I’ve done.
You see, as a post-war child of Holocaust survivors, I grew up with the admonition that food was holy, that you never knew when your next meal, indeed your next morsel, would come, so you had to eat everything – and then some – that you were served, which is why I was a roly-poly kid and a fat adult who never knew when to stop eating no matter how full I became.
About 10 years ago, though, I decided it was time to change my attitude to food, to learn to read signals that tell me that I’m full, which I managed to do although it took a long time, but I now eat far, far smaller portions than I used to eat, and consequently, I’ve dropped nearly 40 pounds of unneeded fat, which I’ve managed to keep off (I also exercise a lot).
Anyway, the point is that you can un-learn early unhealthy patterns – but you must be patient and persistent.
Some ice cream to celebrate your new attitude?
