You know how so many people (nearly every one, I think) who has a problem with weight control is very quick to say that they actually have a “glandular problem”.

“it’s not me, it’s my glands” is the common lament, especially among middle-aged spreaders, who are likely to swear that they’re not eating any more than usual yet they still seem to be putting on poundage..

And by “my glands” what they really mean is their thyroid gland, that bit of tissue that lies at the front of the neck, and the gland that is vital in controlling metabolism and hence weight, too, so that when the thyroid gland becomes underactive (what’s called hypothyroidism), one of the first signs is steadily increasing weight (as well as fatigue, another symptom that plagues middle-aged spreaders).

The problem, however, with blaming the thyroid gland for weight problems is that in the vast majority of people who claim their thyroid is underactive, when such people get their thyroid hormone levels measured, those levels invariably turn out to be within “normal limits”, that is, the levels are not considered to be low enough to warrant treatment, so doctors have always told these people it couldn’t possibly be that their gland was to blame for their increasing weight.

But according to a recent study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, a lot of people who claim that “it’s not me, it’s my thyroid” may actually be right.

In this study, which the researchers claim confirms several other study findings as well, the researchers followed 2400 men and women for roughly 4 years and found that even small changes in a hormone called TSH (a measure of how well the thyroid gland is working) were co-related with weight changes in some individuals, even though many of the TSH levels were still within normal limits.

In other words, even a small change in TSH, the kind of change that would be reported as normal and a change that wouldn’t send the TSH level into the “abnormal level” category, was co-related with weight gain in some people.

The trouble with this finding is that it’s pretty hard to figure out what to do with it.

It could be argued, for example, that everyone get their TSH measured regularly (perhaps once a year) and if there was any change in TSH and a corresponding increase in weight, then that person should go on thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

This is unlikely to be the case for many years, if ever, though.

The more immediate application might be that someone in middle age who’s gaining weight yet swears that they’re not eating any more than usual and still exercising as much as ever should have their TSH level measured and if it’s in the low-normal range, they might benefit from some thyroid hormone.

This is in theory only, of course, because we have no study yet that shows that treating a low-normal thyroid state has any beneficial effect on weight control.

Why is medicine so complicated?

