Want to lower your risks of developing Alzheimer’s disease?
It seems that you can.
Unfortunately, though, it’s much of the same-old, same-old, and that seems to be a hard sell for the average Canadian.
The thing is, you see, that we’re rapidly learning that the risks for Alzheimer’s disease are turning out to be the same as the risks for, you guessed it, heart disease and strokes and so many cancers.
For example, a recent study found that 40 % of people with Alzheimer’s disease had significant small blood clots in the brain.
What raises the risk of blood clots in the brain, in fact, the risks of blood clots everywhere?
Yup: smoking, excess weight, bad diet, sedentary lifestyle.
But if those lifestyle habits are too hard for many of you to manage, then how about just getting – and keeping – some good friends?
Thus, a recent update of the long-term, famous Rush Memory and Aging Project from Rush University in Chicago has concluded that the larger the social network, the lower the risk of showing the signs of Alzheimer’s disease.
In this 21-year-long intriguing study, participants were evaluated regularly for signs of Alzheimer’s disease while they were still alive, and then after they had died, their brains were analyzed for the changes seen with Alzheimer’s disease, such as the notorious plaques and tangles that are the hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis at autopsy.
What fascinated the researchers was that some of these people’s brains had significant brain changes indicative of Alzheimer’s disease (that is, at autopsy, they showed lots of plaques and tangles), yet during life, they had showed few signs of Alzheimer’s disease.
The key factor in that seemed to be the number of social contacts that person had had.
That is, the stronger their social network, the less likely they were to show signs of Alzheimer’s disease in life, even though their brain may already have had significant levels of plaques and tangles in it.
It seems, then, that one may be able to overcome some of the limitations of Alzheimer’s disease (and perhaps other dementias, too) by keeping the brain “alive” with lots of friends and lots of activities.
Of course, I would suggest that a better strategy would be to work on preventing Alzheimer’s disease in the first place, but hey, it never hurts to have more friends, too.
