Want your kid to weigh less, or at the very least, stop your kid from getting any fatter?

Well, if you’re an average parent of an average Canadian kid, the answer is probably yes, you do.

That is, yes, you probably do want your kid to weigh less than he or she does simply because over 50 % of Canadian kids are now considered fat, and that percentage is rising steadily, alas!

Even more scary, the US feds report that 39,000 American kids now have Type 2 diabetes, a disease that was unheard of in the sub-40-year-old bracket until very recent times.

Which is on top of a study from a few months back estimating that over 2 million kids in the US have impaired glucose tolerance, meaning that they are well on their way to getting Type 2 diabetes but have not yet arrived at that station.

So, why are so many kids suddenly afflicted with a disease that may kill them before old age?

(Oh yes, another study just out found that people with Type 2 diabetes are 3 times more likely to die prematurely than people not similarly afflicted).

Because they’re too fat.

And they don’t move enough.

So is there anything you can do about it?

Of course, there is.

It’s what our parents did for us: make them play more and make them eat less.  

Can’t do that, you say?

Times have changed?

Baloney.

It’s easy to do but it takes will power and self-discipline, so hey, maybe it is hard to do after all.

Anyway, according to a recent small study (200 plus families), walking the equivalent of 2000 steps a day (takes about 15 minutes) and eliminating one soda pop a day helped 2/3 of the kids in the study maintain their weight levels for over 6 months.

The kids didn’t lose weight, but at least they didn’t gain any extra weight, and that’s a start, although clearly, to an old cynic like me, it seems that if the kids had been able to add in say 3000 steps a day (20 minutes), they might have even lost a bit of weight.

Only thing is, and again, this is an old cynic speaking, seems to me that your kid is much more likely to be successful at this if you do it along with him. 

And hey, before you tell me that it’s too hard to do, I will counter that I believe that nearly everyone can find 20 minutes a day to do a bit of healthy walking.

If they want to, that is, and if they stick to the plan.

And you have so much to gain from it: you will not only be healthier for it.

But so will your kids.

And maybe even your grandchildren. 

