I don’t know about you but I’m not going to give up my vitamin C just because yet another study has concluded that it doesn’t work.
You see, years and years and years ago, double Nobel laureate, Dr. Linus Pauling, came out forcefully in favour of taking large doses of vitamin C for pretty much everything that might ail you, although clearly this approach isn’t quite as effective as Linus had hoped it would be because Linus is now long dead.
Anyway, the part of Linus’s pronouncements that got by far the most attention from the public was the part about colds and vitamin C, namely that heavy doses of vitamin, doses far in excess of the daily requirements, could not only prevent colds but could also significantly shorten a cold that had already taken root.
So, millions and millions of people, me among them, started taking megadoses of vitamin C either to prevent colds or, more often, to try to shorten a cold that had already started.
And you know what?
Millions of us still swear by this remedy, even though study after study after study has failed to substantiate any benefit from vitamin C in fighting colds.
So, it’s not too surprising that yet another study, this one from the very prestigious Cochrane Collaboration, has come to the same conclusion nearly all the other studies came to: vitamin C megadoses are at best, only mildly effective in cold prevention, and certainly not, according to the researcher, worth the price you’d have to pay for the vitamin if you took it every day.
The one exception, he says, may be people who are very stressed physically, people like marathon runners, who may indeed be protected against catching a cold if they take very high vitamin C doses regularly.
As I said, earlier, though, I’m not giving up my vitamin C just because scientists can’t find a benefit.
Why am I so stubborn?
Because I believe vitamin C megadoses (I take 1000 mg every few hours as soon as I feel a sniffle coming on, which happens about 2-3 times a year) works for me (there is no way a study can identify individuals who may benefit from Vitamin C; a study can only conclude that it doesn’t work in general), and even though it’s probably only a placebo effect, hey, I believe in this placebo, and I’m not letting anyone take it away from me.
Just to cover my bases, though, I have to tell you that as soon as I start feeling ill, I also take megadoses of my mother’s Jewish chicken soup (chicken soup has lots of ethnic variations), and even though I;m not sure how effective it is, it always makes me feel much, much better.


