I know, I know, I know.
I’ve written about this so often and you listen to me so avidly that you already know that colon cancer is the 2nd leading cause of cancer amongst Canadians.
And you also all know that colon cancer is nearly unique as a malignancy in that most cases can be caught at a very early and still treatable stage (just to review: most colon cancers start as pre-malignant, visible polyps that can be easily snipped off the surface of the bowel).
And you know, too, that all of you should start being screened for colon cancer from age 50 on, earlier than that in people at high risk.
And you probably also know that people at higher risk include those with a family history of colon cancer, those with certain GI conditions (such as ulcerative colitis, colon kinds of polyps), and the members of certain ethnic groups (Ashkenazi Jews, for example).
And you probably also know that smokers, the obese, and heavy drinkers are also at significantly higher risk of colo-rectal cancer.
But I bet you didn’t know, mainly because this study has just been published, just how great those latter risks are:
Thus, smokers are diagnosed with colon cancer about 5 years on average earlier than non-smokers, drinkers are also diagnosed on average about 5 years earlier than non-drinkers, and those who both smoke and drink not only stink (sorry, that’s an editorial comment, there), but are also diagnosed with colon cancer about 8 years on average earlier than those who neither smoke nor drink.
So, hey, if you’re a male (men are diagnosed 2 years on average earlier than women, but that may be partly because men are so much more worried about their bowel function than women and thus run to the doctor much sooner with symptoms than women do) smoker and or drinker, you should be particularly concerned about earlier diagnosis of this common malignancy.
Bottom line, though: death from colon cancer is largely preventable in most people, even those who are not male smoker/drinkers.
So, if you’re at an age when colon cancer screening becomes something you need to do, make sure to get your tucches (that’s your “backside” for those of you who are Yiddish-challenged) into your doctor’s office and ask for one of the tests.
It may just save you from dying a pretty needless death.
