A telephone survey of 1600 American teenagers and some of their parents (which was released by the US National Sleep Foundation in conjunction with Sleep Awareness Week – and be honest here, do you really think we need to be aware of sleeping?) came to the less than startling conclusion that teenagers aren’t getting enough sleep.
Who woulda thunk it, eh?
Specifically, over half the teens in this survey admitted to getting less than 8 hours sleep a night on average, which is what the experts consider to be the minimum amount of hours of sleep required for best performance in school.
Also rather unsurprisingly, older teens claimed to be getting significantly less sleep than younger adolescents.
(And there is no reason to believe, of course, that it’s any different in Canada).
So, why aren’t teens sleeping enough?
Well, there are lots of reasons, of course, ranging from older teens having too much to do to fit into a 15-hour-waking-day (including real work to earn money, extra classes their parents sign them up for, sports and other extra-curricular school activities) to studying too hard.
But the most obvious culprit robbing teens of sleep was not one of those “good” reasons but rather, and again this should be no surprise to anyone, the profusion of electronic gadgets in most teenagers’ bedrooms.
Thus, 97 % of the teens surveyed had at least one electronic gizmo in their bedroom.
And the teenagers in this survey claimed they spent about one hour a night on average playing with that equipment such as listening to music or watching the tube or e-mailing their friends or doing who-knows-what on the net, although this skeptical oldtimer is sure the true amount of time that teens spend on those activities is likely much more than most teens will confess to.
Also, not surprisingly, the more electronic gadgets a teen had in his or her bedroom, the less sleep that teen tended to get.
What was surprising to me, though, was how unaware the parents were about their kids’ poor sleep habits.
In this survey, 90 % of parents felt their teens were getting enough sleep, probably because, I suppose, the teens weren’t falling asleep in front of them.
Instead, and this is the part that should wake up most parents, teenagers claim to be falling asleep in class (which may, of course, speak more to the kind of teaching some of those kids are getting), or else they are walking around tired much of the day, including when they are driving.
In fact, half the teens admitted to driving while drowsy, and 5 % admitted to nodding off at the wheel.
Also, rather unsurprisingly, teenagers are trying to deal with their fatigue the same way adults do.
No, not by sleeping more, but rather by covering up their sleep deficit.
Thus, a large majority of kids in this survey admitted to drinking caffeinated beverages in order to deal with daytime fatigue.
Now, I don’t know how you get kids to get to sleep earlier, but I do know this: if your kid is yawning in your face and falling asleep over his mashed potatoes, I wouldn’t let him use the family car at night.


