For reasons this placid-4-double dry cappuccino-a-day man can’t really grasp, many of the people who dislike coffee seem to hate it with a fervor not unlike the one that anti-tobacco folks convey towards tobacco.
And over the years, these anti-coffee people have been only too happy to cite studies blaming coffee for a spate of medical conditions including cancers of various sorts (especially pancreatic cancer), diabetes, and of course, heart disease and strokes, most of the latter anti-coffee bias coming from studies on individuals who have been given exact amounts of caffeine to take in (often in pill form) and who are then subjected to batteries of tests on their blood pressures, heart rates, and so on, which are invariably rocketed into the negative range after they ingest those caffeine tablets.
Trouble is, the objective evidence from large-scale populations in the real world (that is, real coffee drinkers and not volunteer students) points in quite the opposite direction.
Thus, several good studies have linked coffee to lower risks of several cancers, especially liver cancer.
Regular coffee drinkers have also been cited in several studies as suffering from significantly less Type 2 diabetes than do non-coffee imbibers.
And now, the largest study ever done on coffee drinkers compared to non-coffee drinkers (a combination of the huge Nurses’ Health Study and the Health Professionals’ Follow-Up Study) has concluded that, surprise, surprise, regularly drinking as much as 6 cups of coffee a day has no negative impact on the risk of heart disease.
In fact, - and no one seems to have wanted to take this on - those people who admitted to drinking over 6 cups of coffee a day regularly had a slightly lowered risk of being diagnosed with heart disease than did non-coffee drinkers or people who drank less coffee than 6 cuppas/day.
Which doesn’t surprise me a lot, of course, because the thing I’ve always tried to impress on people is that we learn very little about coffee when we base our premises on studies that look only at caffeine because coffee is so much more than just caffeine.
Coffee also contains all sorts of minerals, anti-oxidants, and other chemicals that may play a role in our health.
Besides, even if coffee is not a health food on its own (I’m willing to concede that this may turn out to be the case, although I doubt it), drinking coffee regularly may in fact be a marker for other healthy practices, such as lowering stress levels, raising self-esteem because you get speedier and get more done than that placid tea-sipping quasi-hippie down the hall, and perhaps because coffee drinkers get lots of vital life-sustaining social support from other coffee drinkers (in coffee houses, for example).
Anyway, the thing is unless you have specific health risks (pregnancy, for example, or quite high blood pressure), don’t let anyone take the pleasure of sipping regular cuppa joes away from you.
