The hardest part about getting people to live a healthier lifestyle is putting numbers to the advice you give them.
That is, when you tell someone to say, eat more fruits and veggies, you also should be able to say, “Hey, if you do that, guy, here’s exactly how much you’re going to benefit from that improved diet.”
The trouble is, though, because of the very limited long-term studies that have been done on lifestyle changes, there’ve been very few of these kinds of numbers to offer people to encourage them to shape up more.
So, it’s very encouraging to finally get some hard stats about the benefits of some lifestyle changes.
This comes from a large study known as the EPIC study which has been following over 25,000 middle-aged and senior citizens in Norfolk, England for over 12 years to see what kills them and when.
That’s my way of putting this, by the way; the researchers would likely say that they are actually looking at mortality and morbidity statistics.
Anyway, no matter how you put it, in this study, the researchers have concluded that doing several right things – eating well, not smoking, doing some exercise – adds as much as 12 years to one’s life.
Specifically, eating 5 servings of fruit and veggies a day can add as much as 3 years to life, not smoking can add 4-5 years, and doing exercise can add up to 3-4 years of extra life.
Now, none of this shocks me, of course, because that’s what I’ve long been preaching (hey, just read my books), but it’s nice to get some had numbers to add into the mix.
And for the skeptics who will immediately shout that “Hey, that’s a pretty small added benefit from exercise because after all, you do 4 years of exercise over your life to add only 4 years of life, so where’s the value?”, let me quickly add that the value is two-fold: first, better quality of life from being fit and being able to walk up stairs without huffing (something this study didn’t attempt to evaluate) and second, hey, I may have spent 4 years exercising while you spent 4 years eating nachos and watching American Idol and laughing at me, but I’m gonna get the last laugh when I visit your tombstone (or not) for those 4 added years I get at the end.


