According to the Globe and Mail, a report issued from a group called the Commission for Environmental Co-operation claims that asthma rates in kids have risen dramatically the last couple of decades. By the way, the Commission for Environmental Co-operation is a Montreal-based group, and I’ve noticed over the years that many environmental organizations are headquartered in Montreal, which was, the last time I was there about a year ago, still a very dirty city, probably the dirtiest city in Canada. 
So why, I often ask myself, would environmental groups cluster in Montreal and not in cities actually doing a lot to clean themselves up? 
You think perchance it might have something to do with the fact that Montreal is such a great party city and bureaucrats like to party on someone else’s money? 
Nah, couldn’t be. 
Anyway, back to this report in the Globe which cites the Commission for Environmental Co-operation claiming that rates of asthma in Canadian kids have quadrupled over the last 2 decades, especially among boys aged 8-11, about 20 % of whom are now being diagnosed with asthma, which would be very worrisome stand-alone news, I think, since although it’s quite treatable and controllable, asthma is still linked to about 500 deaths a year in Canada, not to mention a great deal of disability in terms of time lost from school and work and sport. 
So, the big question is: why are the rates of asthma up so alarmingly? 
Well, not surprisingly, the Commission for Environmental Co-operation claims that this worrisome rise in asthma cases may have a lot to do with air quality, both indoor and outdoor, both of which are loaded with pollutants, toxins, and second-hand smoke. 
And who could argue with that?
But at the risk of sounding like someone who never trusts self-serving groups to analyze events (not to mention that I’m someone who never trusts other media’s reporting on events, too), I did a bit of further checking on this report. 
And when you look into it, the news is not nearly as grim as the Globe would make it seem. 
First, let’s just look at some easy factual errors. 
As opposed to what the Globe claimed, asthma is very rarely linked to “chest pain.” 
Yes, asthma does produce wheezing, but not always. 
In fact, asthma is much more often recognized because it produces persistent cough and/or throat-clearing. 
Why? 
Because asthma is a disease of chronic inflammation that leads to over-production of mucus in the airways, and depending on where that inflammation occurs and where the mucus tends to lodge, you can get wheezing, cough, shortness of breath (especially on exertion), or throat-clearing as your most noticeable symptoms. 
Not only that, but when the asthma is worst at night, GERD (reflux disease) is now often considered a presenting sign of nocturnal asthma.
