Naproxen, aka Aleve, Naprosyn, Anaprox, and a host of other familiar trade names has been with us since the mid-80’s when in the guise of Anaprox, it was heavily promoted as a treatment for menstrual cramps. So, you woulda thought, “we should know all there is to know about it after 3-decades of mass use, eh mate?”. 
Well, if you woulda thought that, you woulda been quite wrong, I’m afraid, as a very hyped report from the US FDA has just illustrated. 
In this report, the FDA heavies have just informed the public that a study involving a standard dose of the drug naproxen as a potential preventive for Alzheimer’s disease has been terminated early (after 3 years) by the main sponsor, the US National Institutes of Health, because in this study, naproxen raised the risk of heart attack and stroke by 50 % compared to placebo. 
Interestingly, by the way, in the same study, a pretty high dose of Celebrex (400 mg a day, the same dose that just the previous week had been implicated in a raised risk of heart attack and death) did not raise the risk of any of these complications when compared to placebo. 


So what the hell is going on here? 
How can a drug such as naproxen, that’s been with us for so many years, suddenly prove to be deadly? 
There are several possible explanations for this unexpected finding. 
1) There is so little post-marketing surveillance of all drugs that no new finding should ever surprise us, even if it comes after several decades of use. 
2) Also, this study may just be a one-off, that is, the number of events (that’s a euphemism for heart attacks and strokes) is low, and it’s quite possible that this is all due to chance and that in fact, naproxen is not unsafe, even when used long-term. 
3) Equally possible, naproxen does indeed raise the risk of cardiovascular events but we never knew that because naproxen (indeed, all anti-inflammatory drugs) was never studied for long-term use, that is, all these drugs were developed and marketed for short-term relief of pain and inflammation, so this increased heart risk may simply be a manifestation of long-term use that escaped earlier detection in shorter-term studies. 
4) There may be something unique in either all of or a subset of these 2,500 seemingly healthy “elderly” people that led to this unexpected finding, and the average non-elderly Joe, taking naproxen for a few weeks for his tennis elbow, is at no increased risk at all from that kind of use. 


So, what should a long-term naproxen user do? 
Well, despite the exhortations of the FDA (and most other experts), I don’t know that “talking to your doctor” is really going to get you very far. 
After all, what will your doctor know to tell you that you can’t read from the press reports? 
This whole mess is confusing the hell out of everybody, but especially perhaps, the medical profession. 
One thing you probably should not do, however, is to suddenly stop the use of your anti-inflammatory drug. 
If you read this web site carefully, you will know that a recent study concluded that suddenly stopping the intake of an anti-inflammatory raises the risk of heart attack for 30 days after the cessation. 
So don’t just quit it, but better perhaps to taper yourself off, if that’s the way you want to go. 
Perhaps the best thing to do, though, is this: evaluate your need for these drugs in the first place. 
A recent study, for example, found that acupuncture is an effective therapy for some forms of arthritis, while another study found that magnets can help, as well. 
So, maybe you can get off the drugs altogether, which is, of course, the best course of action, if you can get there. 
If you feel, however, that you have to take an anti-inflammatory, then remember the most important adage in this medical business, START LOW AND GO SLOW, meaning that for every drug, but especially for anti-inflammatories, you should always take the lowest possible dose for the least possible time you can get away with. 
By the way, start low, go slow is an admonition that all male spouses should always remember in whatever circumstance they might find themselves in. 

