If you’re a parent and you’re overweight and you don’t think you need to lose weight, you should think again. A 6-year-long study of moms, half of whom were overweight (high-risk group) and half of whom were slim or normal weight (low-risk group), concluded exactly what you’d expect, I think, namely, that a kid tends to look a whole lot like his or her mom. 
What is surprising, though, is how soon this effect kicks in. 
This study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, followed kids from birth to age 6 and while at age 2, there was no appreciable weight difference between the kids of low-risk moms and the kids of high-risk moms, by age 4, the high-risk kids already had a bit more body weight on average, carried a bit more fat, and had higher average BMIs than low-risk kids. 
By age 6, though, the differences had grown much sharper, so that 30 % of the high-risk kids had high BMIs versus just 3 % of the low-risk kids. 
The obvious concern with such a situation is that several studies have concluded that being overweight as a child is a major risk factor for being overweight as an adult. 
But here’s the number one question: is all this due to a genetic effect so that overweight moms are bound to have overweight kids simply because the whole family just burns calories much more slowly, and thus, there’s really very little anyone can do about it? 
Or is it an environmental effect so that overweight moms simply pass on poor lifestyle habits to their kids and that’s what really accounts for their kids becoming overweight, too? 
No one really knows, of course, although for the overwhelming percentage of overweight parents, it’s probably a bit of both. 

Bottom line: if you’re an overweight mom, you should be cognizant that you’re not just doing yourself harm but that you’re also raising the chance that your kids are much more likely to be overweight, too, and you should thus try very hard to get your weight down by doing all those proper lifestyle things I’m always on to you about. 
And hey, you smirking dads: that goes equally for fathers, too. 

