Everyone who’s ever had trouble losing weight, which is everyone who has ever been overweight, has run into this difficulty: it’s bloody hard to lose weight.
And all of us (yes, that includes me because I spent most of my adult years 30 pounds or so overweight, although as a typical Canadian male, I hid it well) feel that those who’ve never been overweight (people like my frustrating wife) don’t really understand how hard it is to lose those extra pounds. 

There just seems to be something about overweight people that makes it easy for them to put on weight and hard for them to lose it, something most of us have taken to call a “slower metabolism”. 
Trouble is, science has not been able to find this metabolic defect. 
Until now, that is. 
In a wonderful study from the Mayo Clinic, researchers got a group of 10 mildly obese people and a similar group of 10 normal-weight people to wear a specially designed pair of underpants that charted every single movement of every single muscle the underpants wearer made during the day. 
The experiment went on for 10 days (yes, they got a new pair of underpants every day). 
At the end of 10 days, the researchers found that the overweight weight people spent an astounding average of 150 minutes a day more in a sitting or prone position than did the normal weight people. 
All that extra movement translates to a normal weight people expending an extra 350 calories a day more than an obese person, enough to account for a 33-pound weight difference over one year. 
But that’s only one of the main points I want to drive home. 
The other finding was even more interesting to me. 
The researchers got the previously normal weight people to put on a bunch of pounds by feeding them an extra 1000 calories a day for a while, and they got the previously obese people to lose weight by limiting their calorie intake by 1000 calories a day. 
So what happened? 
Those people who normally maintained a normal weight but who had now put on a bunch of pounds still moved much more than did the now-slimmed down previously obese people, in other words, there really is something biologically different about overweight people that makes them “seek the sedentary position”, even after they’ve lost weight, meaning they are quite likely to soon regain any pounds they do manage to lose unless they work extra hard at keeping the weight off. 

Bottom line: if you’re overweight, yes, you may indeed have slower metabolism (just like you always insisted you did), but hey, that’s still no excuse not to try to lose weight. 
You can still succeed, but you’re just going to have to work harder at it than you would like to work. 
Sorry, folks, I don’t make them up; I just report them. 

