National Grid has been fined £41.6m by energy watchdog Ofgem for breaching competition law and "abusing" its dominance of the domestic gas meters market.

It is the largest ever fine imposed by Ofgem, which said the size of the penalty "demonstrates its commitment to taking action where there is evidence that a company has acted in a way that restricts competition and harms customers".

Ofgem's chairman, Sir John Mogg, said: "National Grid has abused its dominance in the domestic gas metering market, restricting competition and harming consumers.

"The abuse has prevented suppliers from contracting with other companies for cheaper metering deals and could discourage suppliers from installing smart meters."

At issue are the contracts that National Grid struck with energy suppliers when the metering market was opened to competition in 2003. The contracts, to supply and maintain gas meters, included financial penalties if suppliers replaced more than a small number of meters. 

This "severely restricted" the rate at which suppliers could replace older meters with cheaper or more advanced models from rival operators, the regulator said. Gas suppliers and customers were deprived of access to lower prices and improved service, it added.

National Grid said it was "extremely disappointed" with the decision and insisted that its contracts did not infringe competition law and should remain in place. 

It said they had delivered "immediate and substantial financial benefits to customers" in the form of lower metering prices, saving them around £120m over the four years of operation. 

Describing the fine as "wholly inappropriate" the group said it would be lodging an appeal with the competition appeal tribunal.

National Grid chief executive, Steve Holliday, said that the group has been "instrumental in helping Ofgem to develop competition in the UK metering industry, and we strongly believe we have never acted anti-competitively in the development of our contracts.

"Despite nearly three years of exhaustive analysis by Ofgem, we believe there is no evidence that National Grid has harmed consumers, competition or gas suppliers, and we are left with no option but to present our case to the competition appeal tribunal."

The contracts were freely entered into, he added, and helped to promote competition in the meter market. Since the market was opened to competition National Grid's share of the market for new and replacement meters had fallen to 40%. 

"I have asked international economists to show me another market where competition has been introduced which has moved from a dominant monopoly supplier to that (company) having only 40% within four years and they have not be able to. 

"We honestly believe we have not done anything that goes against European competition law."

Ofgem's previous biggest ever fine, of £2m, was imposed on London Electric in 2002 for the high-pressure tactics used by its door-to-door salespeople.

Today's record fine from Ofgem comes just days after the energy regulator announced it was launching an investigation into Britain's electricity and gas supply markets following the recent price increases.
