Barclays, Britain's third biggest bank, has dismissed fears that the nationalisation of Northern Rock will distort competition in the UK market and said it remains confident on prospects despite the continued market turmoil.

Chief executive John Varley, reporting 2007 profits virtually unchanged from 2006's record £7.1bn, said fears of unfair competition from the nationalised bank were "a theoretical worry" and be believes the government "is sensitive" to the market's concerns.

"We feel confident that the playing field will be level," he said.

His comments came as Barclays upped its provisions for sub-prime and other risky assets from £1.3bn to £1.6bn in 2007. Despite that, pre-tax profits for the year fell only marginally short of the 2006 record, at £7.08bn against £7.14bn. The dividend total is being raised by 10% to 34p, which the group said was a signal of its confidence.

Varley said he believes the gloom has been "somewhat overstated" in the media and that Barclays has continued to increase its share of the UK mortgage market. "You get the impression that banks have stopped lending. But this bank has certainly not stopped lending," he said. 

The results demonstrate the benefits of the diversity of Barclays' operations, he said. Stripping out disposals, profits were ahead by 3%.

"Our performance in 2007 gives us confidence; the markets threw pretty much everything at us," he said. "We are right to be realistic but we should not feel a lack of confidence."

Barclays "is right on top of our risk," he added.

The investment banking side, Barclays Capital, pushed profits ahead by 5% to £2.3bn despite the £1.6bn credit crunch hit, and there were improved results on the UK banking side. 

At Barclaycard, there was continued progress on bad debts, with impairment charges down by 21% year on year.

Barclays president Bob Diamond, who heads the investment banking side, predicted "at least six months of very difficult and challenging market conditions ahead".

But he was encouraged by the recent reductions in US interest rates and the economic stimulus package, which could mean the slowdown in the world's biggest economy is "shallower and shorter" than expected.

Shares in Barclays, which rose strongly yesterday on hopes of a higher dividend, initially moved lower today but were back on the rise later on to be up 22.5p, or 4.9%, at 482.5p in late trading.
