Shares in Alliance & Leicester plunged today as it reported a near 30% drop in profits for 2007 and warned that margins this year would be hit by higher funding costs.

The group, Britain's seventh-biggest bank, took a £185m hit on sub-prime and other risky assets last year. 

Profits tumbled from £585m to £417m, although the group said its core underlying operating profit was ahead by 3%, at £602m.

Its shares fell nearly 10% to 480p by 3pm, having earlier been down as much as 14%.

A&L had warned last month that its losses from the credit crunch would be triple earlier estimates, a warning that coincided with news that its chief executive, David Bennett, was off work with an abdominal illness.

Most of the increased loss was incurred on A&L's investments in SIVs, which borrow short-term money and then invest it in longer term assets. 

The group said it has agreed funding to cover its borrowing requirements until the the first quarter of 2009, and that funding would remain a priority until market conditions stabilise.

Yesterday it pulled the plug on its 100%+ mortgage deals, along with Abbey and the Coventry building society, in the latest sign that mortgage companies are tightening their lending rules in the face of the credit crunch. 

The profits were at the lower end of analysts' already reduced expectations. Keith Bowman at Hargreaves Lansdown Stockbrokers said the increased cost of funding in the wholesale markets will put pressure on profit margins at the group and its strategy to target current accounts and customer deposit balances "is one which is likely to run into stiff competition in the current environment".

Competition in the market is likely to intensify, with even the likes of Northern Rock still potentially competing, he said.

Alex Potter at Collins Stewart said that while the write-downs were in line with previous guidance, he believes a further £210m of write-downs have been taken direct to reserves. He also says the 2007 results were flattered by further cost-cutting moves.

The outlook statement from the group is effectively a profits warning, he said. The pre-funding the bank has put in place will cost £150m a year, which is equivalent to 7% of group revenues, which he believes could drop by as much as 10% this year, he said.
