More than half a billion pounds was slashed from the stock market value of Rentokil today as the pest control-to-washroom services group hit the market with its second profit warning in two months.

Shares in the company slumped almost 30% at one stage, to 75.1p, their lowest level for 16 years. By midday they were down 24% at 79.8p.

The group has been hit by further problems in its City Link express parcels delivery business, which was behind the last profits warning in December.

The Rentokil chief executive, Doug Flynn, said today City Link's performance was "unacceptable". Although actions are in hand to turn the business round, he warned that this would take time to come through.

Although the rest of the group is doing well, the City Link performance means that 2008 results will be "significantly lower" than the year before. 

The 2007 results, reported today, showed profits from continuing operations had fallen to £142m, from £165.4m.

Analysts were appalled by today's warning and said it could well lead to a takeover bid for the group, which was founded in the 1920s to sell a new rat poison. 

Mike Murphy, an analyst at Panmure, said: "This morning's further profit warning probably signals the end of Rentokil as a conglomerate in our view." The group is now "ripe" for a bid, he believes.

The group also said that the chairman, Brian McGowan, is to step down after 11 years at the company. He will leave by the time of the annual meeting in May and a search is underway for a successor.

Management's credibility is "in tatters" said Robert Morton at Investec, and it will have a long haul to rebuild it. He also believes the City Link "debacle" could lead to a break-up of the company.

When Rentokil flagged up City Link's problems in December, it said the business had been hit by weak consumer spending in the run-up to Christmas.

Today it said that a detailed analysis undertaken since then has revealed more fundamental problems in the business. The foundations for integration of acquisitions were "not solid enough" to cope with the degree and scale of changes being implemented.

A new management team has been brought in and the sales team restructured. The depot integration programme has also been put on hold pending a review of the plans.

Flynn said the position on City Link's profitability for 2008 is currently "unclear" but that it "may not trade better than break-even".

When Rentokil warned on profits in December, its shares slumped from 147p to 114.6p. At the time, Flynn made clear his view that the scale of the stock market sell-off was unwarranted by buying 20,000 shares. Today his investment is showing a loss of almost £8,000.
