Write-offs were a common feature of the early 1990s, not just in the banking sector but in the media industry too. 

In the 1980s, when times never seemed so good, advertising agencies spent billions picking up trophy assets for inflated prices. But they were forced to write down the value of these assets once the recession hit a few years later. Many came close to bankruptcy as a result.

With the world once again lurching into recession, is history about to repeat itself?

Figures last week from Euromoney were greeted with equanimity by the market - the company seemed to be doing its best to weather the storm and analysts suggested the stock was worth holding. 

Buried in the accounts, however, was a £2.5m goodwill write-off, relating to the acquisition of trade publication Metal Bulletin two years ago.

Earlier this month, News Corp was forced to write down the value of its investment in the German media company Premiere by something approaching $400m, having acquired a 22% stake in the business just seven months ago

These write-offs may be the tip of a very large iceberg. When companies buy businesses at the top of the cycle, especially large, adrenaline-fuelled acquisitions, they invariably pay a full price. 

Ego, excitement and competitive tension frequently over-rule common sense and this was particularly so between 2002 and 2007, when prices were driven up by hungry, cash-rich private equity firms. 

Now times have changed and assets that were once thought to be invaluable and inviolate are being exposed as neither. Media companies are struggling and valuations are under pressure. 

Just look at Informa, the specialist publisher, which bought American conference business IIR Holdings for $1.4bn in 2005 and Datamonitor for £502m last year. 

Informa has said nothing about the value of those businesses now but its entire market cap is little more than £800m today – in other words, it is worth less in total than the acquisitions it made. 

ITV may also live to regret its appetite for deals. The group spent £120m on the website Friends Reunited in 2005 and has since hinted that it may have to write down the value of its investment. 

The UK write-offs may be small beer compared to the US, where CBS bought CNET at the height of the boom and News Corp bought Dow Jones and little has yet emerged.

But it is a racing certainty that lively debates will be underway between these acquisitive companies and their auditors. A sense of deja vu may creep over veterans of the media industry, as deal-hungry management are forced to accept that yesterday's silk purse may be today's sow's ear.
