Budget airline Ryanair warned today that profits could fall by up to 50% next year on the back of high oil prices, declining consumer spending and the weakening pound.

Chief executive Michael O'Leary said the European airline sector faces the possibility of a "perfect storm" of higher oil prices, poor consumer demand, weaker sterling and higher costs and there is now "a significant chance" that profits in 2008/09 will decline.

"At our most optimistic, a combination of flat yields and $75 oil would see profits grow by 6% to approximately €500m, but at our most conservative, if forward oil prices remain at $85, and consumer sentiment/sterling weakness leads to a 5% reduction in yields, then profits in the coming year could fall by as much as 50% to as low as €235m (£175m)," he said.

Shares in Ryanair tumbled more than 10% on the stark profits warning, falling to €3.21. Rival budget airlines were also hit, with easyJet down by 6%.

But the Ryanair boss later told journalists at a press conference in London that he would welcome a recession, as it would allow the airline to keep its prices low and would also depress fuel costs across the industry.

Asked if he was concerned about the chill that appears to be spreading across the sector, he said: "Not a lot. In many ways we would welcome a chill or something even colder.

"We would welcome a good, deep, bloody recession for 12 to 18 months. 

"One, it would lead to lower fares and, two, it would expose the regulatory scam that is going on over here," a reference to the group's long-running argument with the Civil Aviation Authority over airport charges.

O'Leary also claimed that a recession would put an end to the "environmental bullshit among the chattering classes that has allowed Gordon Brown to double air passenger duty. We need a recession if we are going to see off some of this environmental nonsense."

He dismissed fears that an economic downturn would lead to lower passenger numbers for the group, saying he expects growth to continue at double digit rates. But profits will be hit as the airline slashes prices to maintain demand.

O'Leary's warning on profits came as the group, Europe's largest low-cost airline, reported a worse-than-expected 27% fall in third-quarter profits, to €35m (£25.54m).

The Ryanair boss described it as "creditable performance in very adverse market conditions", and said he still expects profits for the current year to be ahead by around 17.5% to €470m.
