Prime minister Gordon Brown today defended the government's controversial decision to nationalise Northern Rock amid growing anger from shareholders in the bank, who are expected to receive little or no compensation.

Speaking to reporters at his monthly Downing Street news conference, and flanked by chancellor Alistair Darling, Brown insisted that nationalisation was in the best interests of taxpayers.

"We will and always have put the interests of taxpayers first," he said. 

Brown defended the record of his successor at the Treasury, who has come under increasing fire over his handling of the Northern Rock crisis and a series of other controversies.

"We are dealing with a global financial situation; I believe we have been better prepared because of the actions of Alistair Darling in the Treasury than in other countries," Brown said.

This afternoon the chancellor put forward the emergency legislation in parliament. In his commons statement at 3.30pm, Darling said the draft bill would begin its passage through parliament tomorrow and would only be used to nationalise Northern Rock even though the legislation could be interpreted more widely than that.

Darling reiterated that the bank would continue to "operate as a bank on a commercial basis" at "arm's length" from government. He said more details would be published shortly of how the relationship between the government and the bank would function. 

Unions were meeting today with Northern Rock's new executive chairman Ron Sandler, to discuss potential job losses among the 6,000 or so staff. At a lunchtime press conference in Newcastle Sandler said his priorities were to return the bank to the private sector "as a vibrant, thriving enterprise, and, of course, repaying the taxpayer".

Repayment of the loans was a "feasible prospect," he said, but it would be "some years" before the bank would be able to clear the loans.

He refused to indicate what would happen to the workforce, saying it was his "first day at the bank".

Sandler, who is being paid £90,000 a month to head Northern Rock, made it clear that the bank would "compete vigorously" for business. This is likely to alarm rival mortgage lenders, who are concerned that a state-owned business might have an unfair competitive advantage.

Darling said earlier that he was "very aware of the banks' concerns and I want to be fair by them." But, he added: "I think they also recognise that we have got to have a situation where Northern Rock can continue to trade." 

Shares in the stricken mortgage lender were suspended from stock market dealings earlier today. They closed on Friday at 90p, valuing the Newcastle-based company at around £380m. A year ago it was worth more than £5bn.

In a statement to the stock exchange, the board of Northern Rock made its first comments on the move, which is the first nationalisation of a British company since the 1970s. 

The board, led by chairman Bryan Sanderson, said it was "disappointed" by the government's decision.

It also made it clear that the new management team, led by executive chairman Ron Sandler, would be expected to run the bank with "commercial autonomy" and "at arm's length from the government".

Northern Rock said: "It has been important to have had the time to ensure there were a number of private sector solutions available. The Board hoped that at least one of those options would succeed and is very disappointed that the Government concluded that it was unable to provide funding to support a private sector solution and, in particular, the proposal put forward by the company, which the Board believed satisfied the interests of all stakeholders".

Shareholders had been willing to back a scheme outlined by the Northern Rock board which would have involved the bank being run by former corporate financier Paul Thompson. 

But they are now thought to be considering a legal challenge against the government. Jon Wood, head of the Monaco-based hedge fund, SRM Global, said it was "a very sad day for the stock market, banking industry and the reputation of the UK as a financial centre".

SRM is Northern Rock's largest shareholder, with a stake of over 10%. "The only thing missing from the podium yesterday was Arthur Scargill. It was just appalling," Wood told City AM newspaper, adding that Northern Rock shares were worth at least 425p.

Shares in another hedge fund, RAB, which has just over 8% in the bank, plunged this morning, tumbling 9% to 63p.

Darling, who has his own mortgage with Northern Rock, made it clear earlier today that the government is still open to offers for the bank. "If people have proposals, of course we will listen to them," he told the BBC, although he cautioned that the current state of the financial markets meant it was "not an ideal time" for a deal.

He again stressed that the nationalisation was a temporary move - "the government can't run a bank; governments don't do that" - but said that the timing of a return to private ownership would depend on market conditions.
