Marks & Spencer sent shockwaves through the retail sector yesterday as it revealed its first fall in sales for two-and-a-half years and warned that trading could remain difficult into 2009.

Sir Stuart Rose, chief executive, said high street conditions were the worst he had seen for a decade as shoppers faced rising household costs.

M&S shares slumped 20% at one stage - wiping £1.7bn from its stockmarket value - as it said a poor performance over the crucial Christmas period pushed underlying sales down by 2.2% in the third quarter, well short of City forecasts. It closed down 18.7% at 409p.

Analysts had been hoping for continued sales growth but yesterday's figures show the core clothing and general merchandise division down by 3.2% and food off by 1.5%. The retailer said it had sold more general merchandise than ever - volumes were up 5% - but it had attracted shoppers by slashing prices by 6% on 2006 levels. 

The poor performance in food contrasts sharply with that of its rival upmarket grocer Waitrose, which earlier this week reported a 4% increase in festive trade.

Rose said the trading update was not a profit warning and refused to comment on the biggest one-day fall in M&S shares for 19 years. However, he said the 520-strong chain's Christmas trade showed "UK plc" was "in for a tough time". He predicted the slowdown would last into spring 2009. 

The newly knighted M&S boss is now "battening down the hatches" in the face of the consumer spending slowdown. Retailers, he said, faced the big problem of being unable to pass on rising costs to consumers through higher prices. He added to calls for a cut in interest rates. 

Rose said there was a widening gulf between rich and poor: "I have never seen such a polarised UK economy. The rich are so very, very rich. The West End can't get enough diamonds. But the poor are getting poorer. Outside London it is a completely different economy." M&S sales, he said, reflected this, with south-east stores doing quite well, while Scotland and the north were the worst performers. 

His gloomy view echoes a warning last week in which the fashion chain Next said it was "extremely cautious" about 2008.

Marks & Spencer joins a lengthening list of retailers hit by the consumer spending squeeze. The electrical retailer DSG, which takes in Dixons, Currys and PC World, warned last week that profits would fall £50m short of expectations, and the furniture group Land of Leather saw its shares halved after a stark profit warning.

There have been some winners. John Lewis's department stores and its Waitrose supermarkets did well over Christmas, although it also warned that 2008 would be a tough year. Rose, however, said M&S could not be compared with John Lewis: "They had a good Christmas. Well done to them. But they fish in a smaller pond and a slightly more exclusive pond ... They don't compete, head to head, with Tesco and Asda on things like men's underpants."

Asda said it had a record Christmas but the Wal-Mart-owned supermarket did not back its claim with sales or profit figures.

Ian Dyson, finance director, said M&S had done "a pretty good job" in challenging conditions and that it had held on to recent market share gains. Its growth plans were still in place, he said. "We have had nine quarters of like-for-like growth; this is one quarter of decline. This business is in as good a shape as it has ever been."

However, plans to invest £1bn-£1.5bn on updating stores are "under review". It has spent £1.5bn so far to revamp stores.

Retail analysts had hoped M&S's profits would pass £1bn for the first time in a decade but Philip Dorgan, of Panmure Gordon, described the figures as "dreadful" and cut his forecast by 7% to £988m.

Rose, however, insisted M&S was in good shape. He said: "[It is] a very strong business, under-geared, it has increased its dividend, has very good covenants, has a very good offer, stocks under control and is making a lot of money. It is not in any way a disaster." He later waded into the market to prove his confidence, buying £1m of shares. Lord Burns, chairman, and the food boss Steven Esom bought £100,000 worth. Carl Leaver, who is leading international expansion, spent £70,000.

Shares tumbled across the retail sector as the scale of M&S's downturn sank in. 

Market Share

Nearly four years after buying Safeway, Wm Morrison seems to be back to its previous best - growing its market share and outperforming its bigger rivals. The Bradford-based grocer has seen its market share climb from 11% to 11.4% in the past twelve months, according to TNS Worldpanel. The 9% growth is better than any other grocer over the 12 weeks to December 30.
