Menswear group Moss Bros today became the latest victim of declining consumer confidence, as it warned that it will miss profit targets this year.

Its shares were down nearly 4% at 36.5p by the close after the group, which also takes in the Cecil Gee and Hugo Boss brands, said customer numbers had fallen sharply over the past seven weeks.

Its traditional hire business has also been hard hit by competition from Tesco, Asda and Matalan, all of which are all selling dinner jackets for as little as £35 this Christmas.

The figures are in sharp contrast to online fashion retailer ASOS, which said today its sales have doubled in recent weeks.

Moss Bros chief executive Philip Mountford declined to give precise figures but analysts estimated sales at the group are down by 3% since mid-October, having previously been ahead by 1.5%.

"It's certainly a big negative swing," said Mountford, "and we are not alone in this, it's hitting the whole market."

Menswear is always the first to suffer in a spending slowdown, he said: "It's the first thing to go in any household when budgets come under pressure. Womenswear and spending on children come later."

He added his voice to the growing calls for a cut in interest rates tomorrow. "If you take the average Joe in the street, earning between £25,000 and £50,000 a year, when his mortgage goes up by £150 a month, it makes a huge dent in disposable income."

Sales have fallen across the board, Mountford said, from premium brands such as Ted Baker and Calvin Klein to its Moss range. The hire business has also been hit by growing competition from the supermarkets and discount retailer Matalan: "They're all advertising along the lines of 'why hire when you can buy for £35,' and it has hit us," he said.

Thanks to a strong second and third quarter, like-for-like sales at the group for the year to date are still ahead by 1.1% despite the recent slump.

But Mountford said that, even with the key Christmas trading period still ahead, the poor performance in recent weeks makes it "unlikely" that profits will meet City forecasts.

Analysts had been expecting the group to push profits up from £3.4m to around £3.8m, but are now cutting those forecasts.

He stressed that the group remains financially strong, with no debt on its balance sheet.

"The business is well resourced to both limit any further downside from a weaker consumer environment, and capitalise on the subsequent improvement," he said.

Today's profits warning from Moss Bros follows a growing toll of gloomy announcements from retail and consumer business in recent days, including the pub chain Regent Inns, sofa maker ScS, car dealer Pendragon and restaurant group Clapham House, which operates Gourmet Burger Kitchen and Tootsies. 

B&Q group Kingfisher and DSG, which owns Dixons and Currys, have also warned of tough times ahead while jewellery group Signet, which owns H Samuel and Ernest Jones, last week became the first retailer to issue a pre-Christmas profits warning.

The British Retail Consortium also reported a weak rise in sales last month despite big discounts. UK retail sales edged up 1.2% on a like-for-like basis against last November. The industry association also blamed declining consumer confidence on interest rates, along with the slowing housing market and the turmoil in financial markets.

There were good figures yesterday from Tesco, which said it was looking forward to a strong Christmas. Analysts expect the supermarkets group to further increase its market share, thus increasing the pressure on other retailers.
