Supermarkets group J Sainsbury is to retain its independence after the Qatari-based investment fund Delta Two today abandoned its £10.6bn bid.

Unions welcomed the collapse of the deal but shares in the 138-year-old company, Britain's third-largest food retailer, plummeted by 20%, slashing £1.8bn from its stock market value.


By the close they had crashed by 115p, to 440p, valuing the group at less than £8bn.


Terms of the Delta bid were 600p a share and analysts have now cut back their targets for Sainsbury's shares to less than 500p.


Delta, which made its initial approach back in July, has been forced to abandon its offer because of the increased cost of funding in the wake of the global credit crunch. It also cited the cost of pumping additional funds into the supermarket group's pension fund in an effort to persuade the pension trustees to agree the offer.


The fund, which is headed by British investor Paul Taylor, made it clear that it remains fully supportive of the Sainsbury's board.


"In dealing with the funding implications presented by these issues, Delta Two's objective has been to ensure that following acquisition Sainsbury's capital structure would enable it to remain a robust competitor in its markets, even in challenging industry conditions," it said this morning.


Sainsbury's meanwhile, said it would continue with its recovery programme and believes the business "continues to have great potential under the leadership of its strong management team".


The supermarket group's chief executive, Justin King, who would have received some £12m for his shares and options had the deal gone ahead, said that interest in the group "has been borne out of the company's success to date in implementing its recovery strategy".


He added: "We have remained focused on delivering great service to customers over recent weeks and months and have made significant progress towards making Sainsbury's great again."


Brian Revell of Unite, Britain's biggest union with 20,000 members at Sainsbury's, welcomed the news and said he looked forward to "a period of stability and business as usual".


He warned that interest in the company may not yet be over. "We are aware that significant Sainsbury's shareholders have designs on splitting the company's retail and property interests. Such a split would not be good news in our judgement and we would urge the board to resist the temptation."


Property entrepreneur Robert Tchenguiz is sitting on a 10% stake in Sainsbury's and has lobbied the board to unlock the value of the supermarket's £8.6bn property portfolio by creating a property business.


Delta Two has been battling in recent weeks to raise an extra £500m from the Qatari government in order to fund the deal, which had been agreed by the Sainsbury's board.


Mr Taylor said that Delta Two has "strict investment criteria" and had approached the Sainsbury's deal "in a disciplined manner".


But the additional funding required for the deal, and its impact on prospective investment returns, means the fund could not go ahead with the offer.


He made it clear that Delta remained supportive of the company, in which it remains the largest single shareholder, with a 25% stake.


"Sainsbury is an excellent company with a strong management team, leading market position and strong long-term growth opportunities," Mr Taylor said. "Delta Two remains fully supportive of management's operational strategy."


This is the second failed takeover attempt for Sainsbury's this year. In April, the private equity firm CVC Capital Partners abandoned its 582p a share offer in the face of opposition from the company's board.


Jose Marco-Tobares, retail analyst at Numis, said the failure of the Delta offer was clearly negative for Sainsburys' shares in the short term and Numis is slashing its share price target from 600p to between 475p and 500p.


But he believes Sainsbury's is fundamentally "very strong", with sales and margins rising, and expects rapid earnings growth over the coming years.


He said the food retail sector "is one of the better places to be within retail, as it is less exposed to the vagaries of economic cycles, its companies are benefiting from price inflation, they have strong balance sheets and can still make significant in-roads into non-food retailing". 
