DIY group Kingfisher, owner of the B&Q chain, joined the growing ranks of retailers warning of a tough year ahead as consumer spending continues to slow.

The group today reported a near-12% slump in UK profits over the third quarter, to £45.3m, as sales at B&Q were hit by the weaker housing market and consumer spending squeeze.

Retailers are growing increasingly gloomy about prospects for next year, as interest rate rises and fears over the global economy hit consumer confidence.

Electrical retailer DSG, which owns Dixons and Currys, said yesterday it was bracing itself for a tough 2008 and earlier this week jewellery group Signet became the first retailer to issue a pre-Christmas profit warning. 

Car dealer Pendragon also hit the market with its second profit warning this year, on the back of falling prices for new cars.

Kingfisher's caution on prospects for 2008 came as figures from the Nationwide Building Society showed house prices fell at their fastest rate for more than 12 years during November. It said the average cost of a home in the UK dropped by 0.8% - the biggest monthly drop since June 1995.

Kingfisher's chairman, Peter Jackson, said there had been a good performance overseas, with particularly strong results from France, where it owns Castorama, and in Poland.

In the UK, where consumer demand "is widely anticipated to soften further over the coming months," he said. B&Q's renewal is "progressing well".

Overseas operations account for more than half of Kingfisher's turnover, and the stronger performance there left overall profits for the group 0.8% lower for the 13 weeks to November 3, at £171.7m. Group turnover was 6.4% higher at £2.4bn, or 1.9% ahead on a like-for-like basis, down from 4.3% over the first half.

Kingfisher shares were down 1% at 158p by 11.15am. Retail analyst Ramona Tipnis at Numis said the figures were largely in line with expectations, with a slightly better than expected performance from the UK and France offset by a "disappointing" performance in Asia, which fell into the red with a loss of £4.9m against a £3.6m profit last time.

Earlier this month Kingfisher revealed that it is to part company with Gerry Murphy, its chief executive of five years. He leaves at the end of January and the move sparked speculation that the group could become a takeover target.

The search is underway for a successor, with internal candidate Ian Cheshire, who runs B&Q, strongly tipped to take the job.

Cheshire, a former management consultant, has been revamping B&Q's stores to increase their appeal to women, by focusing on home improvements and soft furnishings rather than DIY raw materials.
