Supermarkets group Tesco shrugged off the gloom surrounding the retail sector with news today of strong sales growth over the third quarter.

Underlying turnover in its core UK stores chain came out at the top end of analysts' expectations, at 4.1% in the 13 weeks to November 24, up from 3.5% over the first half. The group, Britain's biggest retailer, said Tesco Direct and its online grocery operation both delivered "very strong sales" in the quarter.

Chief executive Sir Terry Leahy said the group continued to make "good progress" in the UK, where new space boosted total sales by 7.6%. That included inflation of 0.8%, he said, largely reflecting higher prices in commodities and fresh seasonal foods. Prices in non-foods continue to fall, however.

Finance director Andrew Higginson called on the Bank of England to cut interest rates "sooner rather than later". He said shoppers had become more cautious after the recent rate rises but that the group is pleased with the way Christmas is shaping up so far.

Retail analyst Jose Marco-Tobares at Numis said the results are testimony of Tesco's resilient business model: "There are not many companies delivering these like-for-likes in the current UK retail environment."

But the analyst cautioned that the continued deflation seen in non-food over the quarter could be bad news for other retailers, particularly pure non-food retailers.

Shares in Tesco fell 6p to 481.75p. James Anstead at Citigroup said that while the figures may not be "vintage" by Tesco's own high standards, "they show a robust performance in a tough consumer environment and against competitors who have sharpened up their acts."

The group remains on course to push profits for the year ending in February up to £2.7bn and could break through the £3bn level the following year, according to analysts' estimates.

Overall sales at Tesco rose by 11.8% in the quarter, up from 9.2% in the first half. There was further strong growth overseas, where sales jumped by 25.7%, reflecting a particularly strong performance in Asia.

Tesco made its first move into the notoriously difficult US food market last month, with the launch of its Fresh & Easy chain in California. The first stores have been well-received by customers, Leahy said.

Tesco is planning to build the US business to a chain of 1,000 stores stretching the length of the US west coast and analysts say the business could generate sales of up to $10bn (£5bn) a year within eight years.
