DIY group Kingfisher, which owns the UK's B&Q chain, is to part company with Gerry Murphy, its chief executive of five years, as the home improvement business continues to struggle.

Mr Murphy's departure, said a spokesman, was a mutual decision: "He was looking to go quite soon and the board took the decision on timing". He is to leave the company at the end of January and could receive a golden handshake of up to £2.25m.

The announcement took retail analysts by surprise and, initially, sent Kingfisher shares racing ahead by 5% amid renewed speculation of a break-up bid. However, they later went into reverse, and were 4% lower at 189p by the close.

In his time at Kingfisher Mr Murphy - who is not a retailer and previously worked for Carlton TV and logistics group Exel - has expanded the company, which also includes the French Castorama chain, across Europe and China and into Russia. He also demerged the Comet electricals business into the separately-quoted Kesa.

But Mr Murphy has also witnessed the key UK DIY business boom and bust as shoppers have been hit by rising household bills. At the same time the fashion for spending weekends painting and decorating has passed and more homeowners are now hiring in tradesmen.

The DIY market has contracted sharply, as have Kingfisher's profits. The company is expected to make £400m this year - compared with £660m two years ago. The shares have been supported by bid speculation, but they have tumbled 30% since April as takeover hopes have faded.

Mr Murphy is paid a basic salary of £912,000 and under the terms of his contract will be paid 15% of his salary every month for twelve months if asked to leave. That will generate £1.6m - although the sum will be reduced if he moves to another highly-paid role.

He is also entitled to a pension top-up payment of £250,000 and to 200,000 free shares, worth another £400,000.

Kingfisher is bringing in headhunters to search for a new chief executive. The group's chairman, Peter Jackson, said there would be a "rigorous selection process" to select a successor. "The board believes there is strong internal succession for the role but we will take enough time for a thorough external search. "

The frontrunner among internal candidates will be Ian Cheshire, a former management consultant and the highly-regarded head of B&Q.

Mr Cheshire has been revamping B&Q's stores, with the aim of increasing their appeal to women by focusing on home improvements and soft furnishings rather than hard-core DIY raw materials.

However, the job is also likely to appeal to other leading UK retailers. In recent weeks grocery giant Tesco has lost a number of ambitious senior executives whose promotion prospects are frustrated by the relative youth of the grocer's board directors. Richard Baker, the chief executive of Boots who quit just after the chemist's takeover by private equity group KKR, could also be a candidate.

Mr Murphy, 51, said he believed it was "the right time for me to move on and hand Kingfisher over to a new leader".

Kingfisher said it will update the market on its third-quarter trading later this month and expects to confirm continued positive performance from its international businesses but a tough environment in the UK.

In September, it warned that there would be little chance of an upturn in UK consumer confidence until it was clear that interest rates are heading down.

Analyst Mark Photiades at Landsbanki said the market would welcome Mr Murphy's departure - "given our impression that many shareholders would like to see a change of leadership".

He believes the new boss will launch a full review of the business and may cut the "thinly covered" dividend.
