Bradford & Bingley has begun an urgent search for a "shit hot" chief executive after Steven Crawshaw was taken seriously ill at work last week as the bank realised its profits were being dented by the worsening housing market.

The plight of the former building society helped slashed billions from the value of Britain's banking sector today after it cut the price of its rights issue to allow US private equity group TPG Capital to take a 23% stake for £179m.

B&B shares crashed by more than a quarter and sparked hefty losses throughout the sector. In an effort to reassure investors, rivals Royal Bank of Scotland and Halifax Bank of Scotland both rushed out statements reaffirming their own recent trading guidance, but failed to stem the share slide.

Rod Kent, who is stepping up from non-executive chairman to executive chairman, said he sent Crawshaw home last week. "This is not a fig leaf. I want you to realise this is serious. We almost didn't have him on Wednesday last week," said Kent.

The regulator has been "very, very involved," Kent said. "This is something very serious. They were involved from the very beginning [mid last week]. We had a real crisis with our chief executive and a problem with our profits." 

Kent said Louise Patten, the non-executive director of B&B's remuneration committee, was currently looking at any pay-off for Crawshaw. He had been under pressure since the surprise announcement on May 14 that the group was launching a £300m rights issue, but Kent said that contractual obligations would be honoured. This could amount to £840,000. 

The bank, which is Britain's biggest buy-to-let mortgage lender, blamed the slowdown in the housing market for a sharp decline in profits in the first four months of 2008 to £56m, down from £106m. More customers than expected, many of them landlords, have fallen behind on their mortgage payments already this year, and B&B expects the rate to accelerate during 2008.

The poor performance was also caused by an increase in mortgage fraud, mainly on B&B's self-certified mortgages. Including new writedowns on mortgage-backed investments, it recorded a net loss of £8m.

The bank has also been forced to reprice its cash call to shareholders, and cut its value from £300m to £258m. The rights issue is now priced at 55p a share, having previously been pegged at 82p a share.

Kent said that the "disappointing" trading update showed how tough the housing market has become in recent weeks, but he also admitted that the company's top management could have performed better.

"As executive chairman I am determined to improve our management game, with a strong dose of realism and new urgency," said Kent, who has resigned the chairmanship of Close Brothers, the banking boutique, so he can devote more time to B&B.

"This does give us the opportunity to go out and hire a really shit hot chief executive," he said.

Asked if Crawshaw would still be in the role if he were not ill, Kent refused to be specific but said "we would have had to have looked at processes and people".

'This is not a Northern Rock' 

Kent said that the last nine months have been truly exceptional, and "far worse" than the banking crisis of the 1970s.

But he stressed this was not a repeat of last year's crisis surrounding Northern Rock. "This is a story of disappointing trading, profits coming down. We are still a profitable company. This is not a crisis of liquidity for funding. This is not a Northern Rock."

"A long sustained credit crunch, under which Bradford & Bingley did very well given the proximity of the problem, has now led to a regular economic downturn," Kent warned.

By bringing in TPG Capital - better known as Texas Pacific - B&B is able to raise more than the original £300m planned by the rights issue which was originally priced at 82p a share. It is how being priced at 55p a share - the price at which the private equity group is buying into the bank.

Banking analysts were scathing today, and some were highly critical of B&B's decision to reprice its rights issue.

"Management's previous claims that buy-to-let would remain higher-quality lending than the mainstream now appear very naive," said Alex Potter of Collins Stewart.

Potter believes that B&B's shares are unlikely to recover above 70p, making it a possible takeover target.

"We see the most likely candidates as Lloyds TSB, Santander and HSBC, athough the latter two are more focused on emerging markets opportunities. Lloyds may be tempted into a 'mercy-killing'," Potter suggested.

After a brief suspension this morning, B&B shares crashed by almost a third at one stage, to a low of 60p - just 5p off their revised rights issue price. At 3.30pm, they had staged a partial recovery to 68p, still down 23% on the day.

Royal Bank of Scotland, which is raising a record £12bn from shareholders, fell 3% to 223p, but later recovered to 229.5p after issuing a brief statement reaffirming its trading update in April, in an attempt to reassure investors. In the statement it noted that its UK buy-to-let mortgages are only 1% of its UK loan portfolio. It added: "RBS confirms that the trading guidance provided in the Interim Management Statement of 22 April 2008 remains appropriate for the Group and for the Divisions."

HBOS, whose shares plummeted by 11% at one stage, also rushed out a statement, saying that its cash call "is proceeding according to plan".

The bank said a trading update will be incorporated in the rights issue prospectus, which is scheduled for publication later this month. The trading guidance released in April "is appropriate and current trading remains satisfactory," it added.
