Supermarkets group J Sainsbury today reported a 28% surge in profits but warned that consumer budgets are "clearly under pressure" and that the market will remain "intensely competitive".

Underlying profits for the year to March 22 rose to £488m, from £380m, on sales almost 6% ahead at £19.3bn. Underlying sales, excluding petrol, were up by 3.9%.

The figures are in line with the City's expectations and mark the culmination of a three-year recovery programme at the group, Britain's third-largest supermarkets chain.

Chief executive Justin King, who stands to collect a £6.5m bonus on the back of the company's performance, said Sainsbury's was now "a much better business able to compete and grow in this challenging environment."

The group exceeded its three-year target of generating £2.5bn in additional sales, achieving a figure of £2.7bn. It has now produced 13 consecutive quarters of growth and has more than doubled profits. Customer numbers have risen from 14 million a week in 2005 to more than 16.5 million, the group said.

Having successfully completed the recovery phase, King said Sainsbury's is now going for growth. He unveiled plans to launch an online non-food business next year and said the group would be making a "significant" investment in the venture, including spending of £15m in the current year.

All the supermarket groups have stepped up promotional activity in recent months as household budgets come under pressure from higher mortgage payments and energy bills, and King said he expects this to continue. 

He took issue with yesterday's government figures showing a near-7% jump in food price inflation in the year to April, saying the statistics failed to reflect the full extent of price promotions and that the true figure is around 2%. "The real figure is significantly below what we are seeing in the headlines," he said.

Around 30% of the group's sales are currently done on promotions, with "bogofs" - buy one, get one free - particularly popular with Sainsbury's customers. 

Shoppers will continue to be careful with their cash but are still prepared to spend on a bargain, said the Sainsbury's chief executive. "With discretionary or deferable purchases, people can and are putting them off. But when great value is offered, we see no resistance from consumers ."

He has high hopes for the new online non-food venture although he declined to give any detail of product range at this stage, simply saying it would be "very Sainsbury's".

Freddie George at Seymour Pierce, who is upgrading the shares from hold to buy, believes the company has "a great opportunity" to expand in non food and develop its multichannel activities. He also believes the group's Qatari shareholders, who are still sitting on a 25% stake, will come back with a higher bid.

Sainsbury's shares traded lower after the results, falling 3.5% to 375.75p by 3pm.

King will receive 1.75m shares under a long-term incentive plan, worth some £6.5m at today's price, half of which he will get today and half next year. This is on top of his salary of around £2m.

Some 117,000 employees will also share a bonus of £47m, which brings the total paid out over the past three years to over £150m.
