The Bank of England today unveiled its controversial plan to pump £50bn into Britain's financial system in an effort to rescue the ailing mortgage market - and governor Mervyn King made it clear that the final rescue tally could go even higher.

As he launched the Bank's biggest cash injection into the markets, King denied accusations that Britain's high street banks were being bailed out by the taxpayer. But, speaking to reporters later, he revealed the central bank was prepared to pump even more cash into the system in an attempt to restore confidence in the housing market.

"There is no arbitrary limit on it - it may well go higher," he said.

In the wake of the global credit crunch, the banks have been hoarding cash and refusing to lend to each other, bringing the mortgage market to a virtual standstill.

Chancellor Alistair Darling told parliament that the scheme "is a further step in our efforts to tackle these problems, which have widened in recent weeks, with the increasing cost and decreasing availability of lending by banks and building societies".

The authorities are hoping to rejuvenate the mortgage market but it is clear that conditions for homeowners are likely to remain difficult for some time. The actions of Abbey, part of Spanish bank Santander, help to illustrate the different forces at work. It was the first to respond to the new scheme by cutting rates on its two-year tracker and flexible mortgages by 0.1%. But it pulled out of buy-to-let mortgages sold through brokers and penalised homeowners with smaller deposits by introducing a new range of products. 

Customers able to find a deposit worth 25% of their home will be offered 5.99% for a two-year fixed deal but 6.6% for a deposit of 10%. Abbey, which is still offering rates for deposits of 5%, was one of the last to pull its 100% mortgage range. 

A spokesman for Abbey said: "Abbey welcomes and supports the Bank of England's decision to broaden its range of accepted collateral. It is an important step in bringing greater liquidity to the market.

King dismissed accusations that the banks were being bailed out by the scheme. "The purpose is to protect the rest of the economy from the banks, not to protect banks from their previous decisions," he said.

"It's not true to say that they are being bailed out in any sense."

Under the scheme, the Bank of England will make the cash available to Britain's high street banks via a swap of assets. The central bank will take on mortgage-backed assets owned by the banks in exchange for government-backed bonds. 

The Bank stressed that there would be negligible risk to the taxpayer. Only top-rated assets will be accepted and the banks will be charged a fee to make use of the scheme. They will also have to take a discount of between 10% and 30% on the assets they swap. 

Said King: "If you need it, it is here. But there is a price to pay for it ... this is not a gift." 

The success of the scheme would be judged by how the financial markets reacted over time, the governor said. "The real test is, we suddenly wake up and think that for the last two months no one is concerned about fragility in the banking system." 

Although the scheme is indemnified by the Treasury, it "is designed to avoid the public sector taking on the risk of losses," the Bank said.

"Banks will need, at all times, to provide the Bank of England with assets of significantly greater value than the Treasury bills they have received."

If the value of the banks' assets were to fall, then they would be required to provide additional assets or return some of the Treasury bills.

Many City economists believe that £50bn will not be enough to unblock the mortgage market, and that £100bn or more will be required.

They also said that while the £50bn cash injection should provide some relief to the mortgage market, it did not mean the credit crisis was at an end. George Buckley, an economist at Deutsche Bank, said: "It will certainly help, but banks have far more than £50bn of mortgage debt on their books so it's not going to solve the situation." 

Martin Slaney, head of derivatives at GFT, said there was likely to be some disappointment that further funds had not been earmarked as part of a more long-term plan.

"This rescue plan has been touted as a jump start to the lending markets but it is more likely to serve as a one-off bail-out which plugs a hole for now. We are a long way off from returning to a more liquid lending market where mortgages are freely available." 

It was welcomed by the banks, although they had argued for more. A spokesman for HSBC, Britain's biggest bank, said it remained "one of the most strongly capitalised and liquid banks in the world."

He added: "At an industry level, the Bank of England initiative will help ease some of the current market dislocations in the UK and HSBC welcomes the announcement."

Risks on the loans remain with the banks, the Bank of England stressed. Each swap will be for a period of one year and may be renewed for a total of up to three years. The swaps are available only for assets existing at the end of 2007 and cannot be used to finance new lending. 

The public sector would be exposed to a loss "only in the very unlikely event that a participating bank defaulted and the value of the assets it had placed as security later proved inadequate to cover the value of the Treasury bills".

Ahead of confirmation of the scheme this morning, Conservative leader David Cameron said he supported the package, but it must not be a "bail-out".

Speaking on BBC Breakfast he said: "I do support this package by the Bank of England; I think it's right, we've got to try to get the financial system moving again." But he added: "We want to know that this is sensible measures to get the money supply moving again, not a bank rescue, not a bail-out for banks that have behaved badly."

Earlier Darling had stressed the risk remains with the banks rather than the taxpayer. "The taxpayer's interest is being protected," he said. 

Speaking on Sky News, the chancellor said: "What we're doing is providing banks with things they can trade. This in turn will restore confidence to the market and will begin to get us back into a situation where we see banks being able to lend to each other and therefore the money being available to lend to businesses and individuals."
