You've got to get Yuvraj early. This has been the dominant theme so far, the chorus, of England's increasingly frazzled one-day series in India. With three drubbings already played out, each one lit up by a match-winning thwacking from India's middle-order kingpin Yuvraj Singh, it's still being repeated like a mantra by players and pundits alike. You've got. To get. Yuvraj. Early.

Ian Botham, in particular, seems flummoxed by England's inability to grasp this simple truth. It's as though all along England have been insisting that you've got to get Yuvraj late, or even not get Yuvraj at all. Or they've been putting off getting Yuvraj and doing other things instead, only to realise it's five o'clock in the afternoon and they're still in their dressing gowns surrounded by Irn-Bru cans, eating pickled onions out of the jar and watching Lionel Richie videos on YouTube. With a nagging sense that there was someone they should have got early... Oh dear. Yuvraj.

Because you've got to get Yuvraj early. It's a panacea, a cure-all, a magic spell. It's the nagging tune that creeps inside your head and stays there, echoing freakily. Only yesterday morning I found myself waking up from an uneasy dream in which I was playing beach cricket with a stick of rhubarb while Nicolas Sarkozy whispered repeatedly in my ear "On doit rejêter Yuvraj tôt" only to open my eyes and find myself dressed in nothing but a pair of batting gloves and scrawling the words "You've Got To Get Yuvraj Early" on the wall with a bright red lipstick. I was so shaken up I had to get off the bus.

This is the grail, then. But what if you do get Yuvraj early? What next? The former England under-17 bowler Rory Trouser-Legge toured India on one of the ECB's early academy tours. During a non-first-class 40-over match against a scratch Punjab Sunglasses XI Cakebread did get Yuvraj early, successfully inducing a skied dab-paddle with a trademark one-that-does-nothing left-arm dart.

"We'd talked about getting Yuvraj early a lot on that tour," Trouser-Legge told me. "I'd even begun to have funny dreams about Helmut Kohl repeatedly whispering "Sie müssen sich Yuvraj frühen" in my ear. But you never think it will actually happen. I still don't remember getting Yuvraj early. Everything just went black and I woke up lying in a single bed in a small room outside Leicester wearing a grubby white wedding gown with six weeks of beard growth, a keg of cider in my hand and a sense of devastating ennui. I'm still there now. You're taking all the blanket."

Still, there are those who say the notion that you've got to get Yuvraj early has already become a distracting over-simplification. And that England would be better off concentrating on other things, like bowling straight, fielding better, improving their basic skills, finding a settled batting order and rebuilding from the grass roots up the ECB's existing coaching structures. At which point everything starts to go a little fuzzy, your eyes glaze over, your hands clamp themselves over your ears and a single, brilliantly simple phrase keeps coming back, over and over again. You've got to get Yuvraj early. You've got to get him. Yuvraj. Got to. Early.
