For Rafa Benítez it's been a season-long battle, one that reaches another peak this afternoon as Liverpool travel to Manchester United. So far we've had the lot. In-fighting. Fluent, aggrieved gesticulation. Sub-clauses, boilerplate and even talk of supplementary annexes, innominate terms and collateral consideration. For the breathless observer, there's only one question left: is this the most exciting managerial contract wrangle ever?

The obvious answer is yes, given that mentioning Benítez's contract in an arch tone of voice is now a compulsory element of most forms of human intercourse, as though not mentioning it would be a hugely embarrassing omission, like saying "typewriter" when you mean computer, or secretly not enjoying depressing TV series about terse people smoking in the 1970s.

"The manager may not have signed his contract," Clive Tyldesley mused on ITV on Tuesday night as Liverpool marmalised Real Madrid. "But this ground comes alive on nights like these." This seemed so loosely strung together that for a moment there was the terrible thought that Tyldesley might begin every sentence like this ("The manager might not have signed his contract but I'll never get the fishpaste stains out of these chinos") due to some terrible verbal tic.

In fact he was just paying his respects to a contract that now feels like a palpable presence. We picture the contract as pristine and crisply-stacked, but also somehow warm and fleshy. Rest your cheek on that pillow of pale-banana foolscap and you might smell not just pulp and resin, but something more fetid, straining with vivid, bloody life. Perhaps a part of us even expects to see Benítez literally brandishing the contract on the touchline, furiously drawing his players' attention to the tracked changes in clauses 18.1 through to 18.24, or frantically thumbing its extensive indices.

This level of involvement is very new. In the early days of football the secretary-manager's tersely penned and heavily blotted contract tended to be kept beneath a loose floorboard in the half-height dungeon in which he would be routinely shackled for the night. Standard clauses included a requirement that the manager spend match days slumped in a musty backroom corridor crying into his moustache and that he allow senior director Mr Liniment to stand too close to him breathing heavily for at least half an hour every Thursday.

During the 1970s it was fashionable for managers to insist on "working without a contract". This was based in a sense that contracts were in some way a trick. They contravened the manager's vision of himself as a seeker after higher things, a pin-up and visionary.

How times have changed. There's even a sense now that Liverpool rely too heavily on Benítez's contract, that they're a one-contract team, that thought should be given to, say, nurturing Sammy Lee's mild reservations over his annual leave entitlement. There are even those who say the entire Benítez contract wrangle is no more than a fatal distraction from the real business of his team inching and grappling its way towards its first League title for 19 years. That maybe everybody should stop talking about it for a bit. Which can't be right, surely.

