To the Spurs-centric, or Premier League-inflected observer, the appointment of Juande Ramos (note: yes that Juande Ramos) as manager of Real Madrid (note: yes that Real Madrid) might seem a slightly unexpected move.

Of course, all managers get sacked at least once in their careers. And all managers have terrible spells of anti-magnetism where only an abrupt and cathartic public rubbing-out is going to reverse the prevailing voodoo. But let's be clear: by the end of his time at Spurs Ramos was in absolute freefall. He looked, not so much like a managerial novice, as like a managerial saboteur, or a managerial satirist providing a cleverly realised pastiche of the frowning southern European uber-coach.

Never mind the mitigation. Forget for a second the convoluted White Hart Lane management structure and the perversities of Damien Comolli's talent-spotting regime. It does still seem a bit surprising that Madrid should be so utterly focused on Ramos's successful spell at Sevilla that they're willing to disregard completely the lurid debacle that his final months at Spurs became.

So, for a moment, let's not disregard it. Ramos was appointed at Spurs in October 2007. He inherited a team that had finished fifth in the league two seasons in a row. Four months later this team, plus Jonathan Woodgate, won the Carling Cup. This was Ramos's sole, brilliant high; an entirely false one and a turning point. Including that final he lost just five of his first 28 games. After it he won just five of his final 26.

It was at the start of this season that things became irredeemably sticky. Ramos didn't just have a poor start, or even a bad start. He had the worst start. Two points from Spurs' opening eight matches: nobody had ever done this before. It wasn't just the points, either. It was the sheer weight of numbers of Ramos's many misfortunes, the thickness with which they came rushing past.

Ramos proved a master of the high-speed freezing-out. Usually the freezing-out process takes a little while. Players need to be disaffected, riled and mistreated over a period of time. Ramos cut straight to the chase. Squad numbers were withdrawn almost before they'd been offered. The £5m midfielder Kevin-Prince Boateng was frozen out so quickly some Spurs supporters hadn't even had time to become infuriated by him, or at least to decide exactly what it was about him they ought to become infuriated with.

Player disaffection proved to be his defining motif. The noises off and obiter dicta emerging from the Spurs dressing room proved to be so peculiar and so openly hostile (Woodgate said Ramos was probably going to get the team relegated; David Bentley described the team's form as "shit") that it seemed the players had come to believe Ramos was utterly marooned behind his Spanish incomprehension, unable even to grasp the gist of any translation.

A fuming, mute quality was Ramos's other great managerial tool. By the end of his reign he seemed unable even to communicate by gesture or facial expression. On the touchline he appeared totally paralysed. In press conferences he insisted to the end on using a translator, despite evidence he didn't actually need one.

Personnel-wise, his time at Spurs resembled a series of bungled kidnaps and poorly-planned hostage-grabs. Comolli decided which players would be bought. And, in his turn, Ramos duly alienated, isolated and undermined them.

He obviously didn't want Darren Bent. And presumably he didn't want Roman Pavlyuchenko either. The decision to replace the latter with the former towards the end of the 2–0 defeat at Portsmouth, at a time when there was nothing to lose by playing them together, seemed to encapsulate Ramos's streak of self-destruction. If he could have got away with simultaneously substituting both players, not to mention placing Ricardo Rocha in the stocks, pulling down Tom Huddlestone's shorts and slapping Comolli about the cheeks with a goatskin-leather duelling glove, he'd probably have done that too.

This was the central absurdity to Ramos's peculiar bafflement. He managed to fail to come to terms with the "European-style" club hierarchy; despite actually being European himself and having worked extensively with the dual role of manager and sporting director. Still he was thrown, baffled and thoroughly freaked out. Let's just hope, for everyone's sake, there aren't any interfering club presidents around the place at Real Madrid.

When Ramos was finally sacked after the defeat by Udinese in the Stadio Friuli, Spurs had lost four of their previous five games and looked good for losing many more. Disastrous managerial reigns, the real, irreversible stinkers, are quite rare. When they come along, they're worth lingering over. The endgame to Ramos's time at Spurs already looks wonderfully stark in its failings. Perhaps a spell of similarly vertiginous, funfair-mirror-reflection success at Real Madrid — a Champions League title perhaps — would complete the picture.

It might even happen too. Football is a perverse and counter-intuitive sport. So all the more reason to dwell, for now, on the absolute and impressively multi-faceted nadir of the man the Spurs players once called The Perfect One.
