What a match this was. Harry Redknapp promised to bring vibrant, attacking football back to Tottenham Hotspur. And so he did, even if for long periods the large majority of it came from the opposition. Local derbies – particularly the north London sort – can be tedious, stoppage-strewn affairs. This was a brilliantly entertaining game, illuminated by Arsenal's gathering tide of smooth attacking football, a perfect moment, in isolation from David Bentley, and an effervescent and unexpected comeback by Redknapp's team. 

This game came with baggage for everyone concerned. Having failed to win a league derby match for more than eight years, Spurs carry a mid-range inferiority complex. But for Arsenal this was all about more recent history. Six of Arsène Wenger's players tonight were on the pitch during January's 5-1 Carling Cup thrashing at White Hart Lane. Another year older, another year stronger, the likes of Theo Walcott, Denilson and Niclas Bendtner will have prepared for tonight with some notion of revenge in mind. 

That they failed to get it says everything about their team's defence, rather than its vigour going forward. Walcott was thrilling, direct and irrepressible in his approach play in the first half (albeit lacking a tangible end product). Denilson was terrier-like and precise in midfield. The first goals may have come from 30-something defenders stealing in on the end of set pieces. But the vim the thrust and the high tempo passing that drove Spurs back for an hour came from a youthful and wonderfully committed midfield (all aged between 19 and 21 ). 

Robin van Persie, still only 25, was the most incisive player on the pitch. His career has been interrupted by injury, but he has six goals this year and looks to have a dead-eye swagger about him: three assists and a goal tonight, and an air of never really being hurried in his work. 

Who knows whether this team will ever actually see its plaudits for lovely performances translated into actual trophies won. The squad is still a bit thin to have real hopes of pushing Chelsea and Manchester United all the way in the Premier League. This game seemed to encapsulate Arsenal right now: brilliantly convincing for sustained periods, but always vulnerable. 

For Spurs there was evidence of far greater commitment than was the fashion before the arrival of Harry Redknapp and his magic confidence potion. And even before the thrilling and relentless comeback there was that spectacular opening goal. A word about David Bentley, who had an excellent game here. They used to like him at Arsenal. Throughout the extended whispering campaign of his youth team days, it was always Bentley the fans returned to, much in the same way Jack Wilshere is the current Youtube heart throb. 

The loud boos that greeted his first touch tonight were all par for the course. But still, Bentley really did want to play for Arsenal when he was there. He just didn't get picked very often. 

His performance at the Emirates bodes well for the rest of his season after an iffy start. The goal was a brilliant piece of explosive improvisation. It's the kind of thing you expect from a player right at the top of his game and cooking on confidence; not from someone dropped by club and country in the last month. 

Bentley had his moment; Spurs had their late surge. Arsenal have the same old nagging questions, brilliance undone by carelessness.
