This has been a big week for pretending the Premier League title race is still interesting. Wins for Chelsea and Liverpool were greeted by Guus Hiddink and Rafa Benítez with the standard feisty springtime posturings of the second and third place-elect, the talk about there still being plenty of football to play that has become a rite of the season, like marvelling at the crocus, emblem of renewal in nature, becoming enraged at the vast stacks of Easter eggs already clogging the aisles of Lidl and brooding about death.

This year it does feel like there's something missing. For the first time in a while Arsène Wenger has been unable even to pretend to be pretending that the Premier League title race is still interesting. Instead Wenger has turned his attention to the pyrrhic glories of finishing above Aston Villa in fourth place. This is only right, of course, but the spectacle of a former colossus in reduced circumstances is always a sad and upsetting thing, like the first time you noticed that your dad wasn't actually very tall, or that The Fonz, rather than the coolest man in the world, was in fact a leather-jacketed fantasist who lived above a garage.

Wenger's March-into-April jousts with Alex Ferguson were often described as "a soap opera", and they did at least have the feel of a star vehicle. Watching him raise his wily dukes in the scuffle for fourth feels more like one of those doomed spin-offs from a successful sitcom, where a popular character is seen jarringly out of context, suddenly having complex personal issues and living in a brightly lit apartment. This is no longer Friends. It's Joey. Where's Ross, you wonder? And why is Arsène making stilted small-talk with an entirely new set of best mates, at least one of whom once played the excited hungry man in an advert for Pringles?

A disappointing Wenger spin-off would probably be called Arsène or The Professor. And perhaps, looking back, he never should have become The Professor in the first place. Professors make us feel uneasy. We feel responsible for them. We worry they might begin to rant or to smell of fish paste. Having lived through the Wenger era, when his every word seemed laced with executive importance, it's impossible not to feel something similar. This guy used to be somebody. No, really. Why isn't anyone listening? And why am I walking around Londis dressed in a beige car coat, covered in toast crumbs and talking too loudly about tea bags?

Still, time passes quickly and one man's white-hot contemporary era is another's cable TV nostalgia clip show where everyone's hair is slightly wrong. There has as yet been no sign of Wenger appearing on the touchline in odd shoes, or talking endlessly in press conferences about his disapproval of certain characters in Emmerdale, perhaps just a sense of some tectonic shift taking place before our eyes.

And watching him stalk the technical area tomorrow afternoon as Arsenal take on Burnley in the FA Cup, there's bound to be a sense also of that moment edging closer when you find yourself taking him by his damp and quilted overcoat sleeve, leading him hacking and snuffling up the stairs of the bus, patting his liver-spotted hand gently and whispering for the last time that, yeah, he's still big, sure he is, it's just pretending the Premier League title race is still interesting that got small. 
