Two interminable Old Trafford summer transfer sagas: two happy endings for Alex Ferguson. The signing of Dimitar Berbatov from Spurs was the final - and pretty much the only – positive act of a three-month transfer window campaign conducted almost entirely in the shadows. As of 11.58pm last night Ferguson will be hugely satisfied with his summer's work. This has been a masterful game of patience.

Still, there will be those who question the size of Berbatov's £30.75m fee; not to mention the extent to which the maverick and occasionally wilful Bulgarian, a 27-year-old without a top European club on his CV, will be able to make a frictionless adjustment to playing for the reigning double champions. United needed a centre-forward. This was clear even during the glorious successes of last season. But did they really need Berbatov?

On the face of it, the answer looks like an overwhelming yes. "His style and ability will give the team a different dimension," Ferguson said last night, putting his finger on exactly why he pursued Berbatov so vigorously, in preference to the likes of Michael Owen, Thierry Henry or David Villa. Even before they've shared a training ground jape or pursued an ill-advised hip-hop goal celebration, a Berbatov-Wayne Rooney attacking partnership is a mouth-watering prospect.

Rooney is a large factor in all this. The failure, at United and England, to settle on his most effective attacking role has been widely discussed. A significant part of this is that Rooney has yet to forge a really fruitful striking partnership, the kind of double-act that can define a career. Berbatov plays naturally in the final third and gravitates towards central areas. He holds the ball. He flicks it on. He's got the vision to find a pass for a scampering, workaholic support striker. Dimi's brains and Wayne's brawn: what's not to like?

There's also the matter of Ferguson balancing his attack. Berbatov has an unpredictable quality on the ball, but in many ways it's his orthodoxy that makes him a smart acquisition. This is the player United have missed, a physically imposing No9 with a Velcro touch and a knack of scoring goals from central positions. Berbatov has already been compared, rather hopefully, with Eric Cantona. Perhaps he's closer to Teddy Sheringham, another tall, creative centre-forward, also signed from Spurs. United now have another option: the obvious option. As such Berbatov should also take the heat off Cristiano Ronaldo, who rescued so many games for them last year with his brilliance from left-field.

And yet, somehow, there is still a vague sense of a gamble being taken. This is a player who at Spurs produced sublime moments, breathtaking fortnights and a peerless highlights video. The feeling has always been that there's more to come. "Dimitar is one of the best and most exciting strikers in world football," Ferguson has said. Exciting, yes. Best? Not yet.

He's been around for a long time, too. Berbatov won his first international cap in 1999. Five years were spent at Bayer Leverkusen. When his big move came it was to Spurs, not to Milan or Madrid. At 27, he now has his chance at the very top. He may have played in a Champions League final, but this is undeniably a step up. For club and country Berbatov has always been the stand-out star, the gadfly, the favoured son. No longer. Changes will have to be made, a different kind of pressure absorbed. It's not much, but it's something.

Then there's the argument that Berbatov isn't an out-and-out goal scorer; that alongside Carlos Tevez, Rooney and Ronaldo he provides another creative talent rather than a cutting edge. This isn't entirely fair. Berbatov scored 57 goals in 100 games in his last three seasons at Leverkusen and 27 in 70 league games for Spurs. These are decent stats. And while he may have only a mediocre scoring record against the Big Four in England, he has been playing for Spurs, enduring patsies of the ruling elite.

Plus, with Berbatov it's not about what he's done so far. It's about what he might yet achieve: an unarguably top tier talent, with game-breaking vision and touch that will stand out at even the most rarefied level. Berbatov can win you any game, anywhere. This is what Ferguson wants him for.

Perhaps of more concern for United is the bigger picture of how the team evolves to incorporate their new man. Now that Ferguson has paid £30.75m for a centre-forward he's going to have to play him. An orthodox 4-4-2, with Rooney in a second striker role, would be a significant departure from the more fluid, and hugely successful, attacking line-ups of the last two seasons.

Either way United now have a giddy array of shapes, angles and combinations with which to set up their attack. Finding the most effective one might be the real challenge of what is certain to be, in any event, a fascinating piece of business.
