It has been a tough week for our sporting billionaires. Roman Abramovich announced losses of £6.3bn, although, given that this announcement was made as part of an amusing extended burp that also contained the word "sausages", it's not clear how serious a personal blow this is. Plus of course Sir Allen Stanford has got caught up in some kind of terrible misunderstanding that will no doubt be cleared up very shortly. Either way, and not for the first time, it seems there may be something not quite right about our billionaires. That our billionaires may not be top drawer after all. That, in fact, they may even be rubbish billionaires.

This shouldn't come as a surprise. Sporting billionaires have always been seen as slightly dippy by the rest of the billionaire community. Being a sports billionaire is a little bit like being a sports journalist, in that neither of them seems proper. No doubt women you meet at parties say things like "Hmmm, a sports billionaire, how interesting, my husband would love to do that", before edging off to find someone more substantial – and grown-up – to talk to.

The fact is an interest in sport is almost entirely incompatible with a successful career as a billionaire, or as anything else for that matter. Sport follows you around, chivvying you, taking your eye off the ball. It's like being constantly drunk. On absinthe. While delivering a presentation on risk-adjusted bond pricing to 300 of your immediate bosses. Or being engaged in a deeply serious conversation about what you really want out of this relationship, while in the background you can't help noticing that, as things stand, Sri Lanka need 34 runs to win from 57 balls, which should be straightforward but the pitch is offering a little oh dear you seem to have a cocktail stick protruding from your eyeball and the chair opposite is now empty, but never mind, if you just shift the cocktail stick a little you can still see most of oh well bowled.

At the same time, being a billionaire is very difficult. It requires focus. It almost certainly means getting up quite early. It also means no longer having about 50 working days a year when you don't really care or concentrate much because there's a Test match on. People notice these things. Other billionaires notice.

So perhaps it's little wonder some of our sporting billionaires are lacking in basic skills, basic technique and basic actual money. When Stanford arrived at Lord's last summer he seemed at first like an entirely coherent and functioning egotistical billionaire, in his solid gold hat and winkle picker loafers made entirely from parmesan cheese shavings. But look at the pictures again. One of his cufflinks is a paper clip. And rather than wearing trousers, his legs have been "coloured in" using a permanent marker.

What to do about these basic errors? Some say we should adopt wholesale the Italian system, whereby promising jowly, glassy-eyed, mendacious youngsters are taken away from their parents and schooled in how to wander around dressed in an ostrich fuzz overcoat waving their pudgy fists in self-congratulation. Either way something needs to be done. Because the alternative, the end game – and I don't want to be alarmist here – is the prospect of sport entirely free from meddling billionaire involvement. And who among us wants to see that?
