From the right angle Liverpool's defeat of Manchester United on Saturday might have the look of a turning point - or at least, a significant moment - for Rafa Benítez's Liverpool in the Premier League. They're joint-top of the table; they've beaten the champions for the first time in eight league games; and they did it, until Steven Gerrard's introduction on 68 minutes, without their two best players. At the final whistle Benítez was briefly beside himself with excitement. It's not hard to see why. In personnel and execution this was a Benítez wet dream of a win. 

His team produced a controlled and tactically adept exhibition of what Sir Alex Ferguson called "tackling and harassing". It was a display of selfless verve from a Liverpool starting XI without any real stars, one that brought to mind Benítez's La Liga-winning, no-big-egos Valencia of 2003-4. 

Benítez earned his reputation with this kind of greater-than-the-sum-of-its-parts team-building. It's a specific talent; and one that remains distinct from other managerial skills such as, say, being able to assemble and get the best out of a squad of genuine superstar players. 

It's also an approach that puts unusual focus on the manager. It stokes his self-regard, the sense of his own tactical cleverness, encouraging him to compete from the sidelines for the man-of-the-match champagne. At one point during a break in play at Anfield Benítez spoke urgently for more than a minute on the touchline to new signing Albert Riera. 

Riera immediately began to pick the ball up in deeper positions and cause Wes Brown problems. This was real superstar management, the man in the suit practically on the field of play, his players a willing plasticine for his genius. 

But does it change anything? Liverpool's problems remain. The club's fans must hope this latest one-off act of managerial wizardry will not be allowed to disguise the fact that the team are over-reliant on two players. They still need an injection of genuine quality in other positions, plus suitable backup for Gerrard and Fernando Torres. 

Beating United was a triumph for Benítez's in-game brilliance and the zest of his supporting cast members. Winning the Premier League will require more stars, and not just in the technical area
