In the end the appointment of Gianfranco Zola as West Ham manager was a case of last man standing. From a shortlist of four Zola was the only revered, recently retired ex-footballer not to rule himself out. Slaven Bilic wanted to carry on managing Croatia part-time. Michael Laudrup preferred a one-and-a-half year deal at Spartak Moscow. And Roberto Donadoni didn't want the job enough to put himself through the selection process. So Zola it is, then. A lovely man, a sublime footballer, but entirely unproven in club management. It's an exciting choice, if only because Zola is a charismatic name. But make no mistake, West Ham have taken a huge gamble. 

Zola has been appointed West Ham manager because the club must feel he will do a better job than Alan Curbishley. This is presumably based on three things: his playing career; his extremely brief coaching career; and his character. 

Zola was, of course, a wonderful player. His peak years were spent at Napoli (where he played alongside Diego Maradona and Careca), Parma and Chelsea. It's a career that does give him some natural advantages as a manager in England. Although he was 30 when Ruud Gullit signed him, Zola ended up playing more club football in London than anywhere else and more matches in the Premier League than Serie A. 

And there was more to it than just his 249 games and 89 goals. Footballer of the Year in his first, incomplete season, he was later voted Chelsea's greatest ever player in a fan vote and even awarded an OBE in 2004. Zola was a uniquely well-adjusted import, gracious on the field and entirely at home – albeit in the cosmopolitan environs of west London – away from it. 

As a coach, though, it's all guesswork. No one, not even Zola, knows if he has the peculiar talents required to become a successful club manager. The last two years have been spent as assistant coach to the Italy Under-21 manager Pierluigi Casiraghi. 

Helping to coach Italy's young players – and by all accounts Zola was very much a No2 in that set-up – has very little bearing on the challenges of a managerial job in the Premier League. It's not even as though Zola's charges enjoyed much success: the Olympic team was eliminated by Belgium in the quarter-finals in Beijing. Last year they went out in the group stage of the European Under-21 Championships, a tournament Italy have dominated over the previous 15 years. 

Zola, then, is a character appointment, a reputation appointment and a nice-guy appointment. It's a fascinating punt. And one that goes back to an old question English football club directors just don't seem to be able to get past: does a great playing career provide any kind of preparation for management? From Billy Wright's (disastrous) spell at Arsenal shortly after retiring as a player, through recent high-profile walk-on parts for the likes of David Platt, Stuart Pearce and John Barnes, the big-name appointment has a distinctly mixed record of success. On the plus side Zola will perhaps look to the example of his former team-mate Gianluca Vialli, who took over at Chelsea midway through the 1998-99 season and won the Cup Winners' Cup, the League Cup, the FA Cup and European Super Cup before being unexpectedly sacked in 2000.

There is also an argument that times have moved on. The Zola-style appointment makes far more sense than it ever did. Managing in the Premier League does have some unique requirements: an adeptness with the media and an ability to command respect among a uniquely high-profile generation of players. Zola ticks both these boxes. 

Plus, top managers do far less actual coaching now. Zola will have plenty of help in the more hands-on areas while he learns the day-to-day business of club management. Also in his favour, he's clearly an intelligent and resourceful man and he speaks good English. 

Beyond that, there's nothing to base a judgment on. Curbishley was sacked, apparently, for his mediocre record in signing players. Zola has never signed a bad player, but he's also never signed a good one, or even a mediocre one. Nobody knows his facility in the market. Nobody knows how he's likely to react to the uniquely sapping pressures of top-tier club management. Nobody knows his preferred formation, his attitude towards a club youth policy, his ability to judge a top-class centre-half. Nobody knows if he's lucky or not. 

West Ham have decided to find out on our behalf. It should, at least, be fascinating to watch.
