It's a funny business, international football. At its best it looks like a wonderfully pure form of the game, liberated from the distorting effects of the transfer market. At its worst, it can seem like an anachronism, undermined on all sides by the TV-rights driven beano of the Champions League and the generally fluid notion of nationality itself.

Euro 2008 is peppered with players whose nationality is far from straightforward. These range from the genuine ringer, with his fig-leaf flag of convenience, to the zealous, if sometimes distant, claimant of an ancestral tie.

The real opportunists stand out a mile. A bona fide Brazilian, Roger Guerreiro only turned up in Poland in 2006. Turning into a Pole has been good for his new nation - he scored for them against Austria here - and good for Roger too. A move from Legia Warsaw to Ajax has been mooted for the new European. Nice to see this tournament helping a chap get on.

Another Brazilian midfielder, Mehmet Aurélio (nee Marco Aurélio Brito dos Prazeres) played for Flamengo in Brazil before joining Trabzonspor and becoming a Turk in 2006. Marcos Senna played as a professional in Brazil for five years before turning up at Villarreal in 2002. He took on Spanish citizenship in 2006 and is currently keeping a Basque, Xabi Alonso, and a Catalan, Cesc Fábregas, out of the midfield.

Players like these are distinct from those who just happen to have been born somewhere else. Miroslav Klose came to Germany from Poland in 1985, when he was seven. Lukas Podolski, also born in Poland, moved to Germany with his family when he was two.

Much has been made of Germany's Polish contingent, but this kind of family migration is common in central Europe, where borders are porous. Ivan Rakitic of Croatia (who has effectively replaced the Croat-Brazilian Eduardo in Slaven Bilic's starting XI) was born in Switzerland and played for the Swiss Under-17, Under-19 and Under-21 teams. Nobody's saying he isn't Croatian, though.

Similarly Martin Harnik plays for Austria despite having never lived there (his father is Austrian and he has said that he "feels Austrian"). There's none of your Rogers going on here. It's all just part of the complex business of European identity.

Even when a little opportunism is involved, it can be hard-earned. Portugal's Brazilians, Pepe and Deco, arrived in the country at the ages of 17 and 19. Both took a gamble. Deco, in particular, had already failed to make the grade in Brazil. He deserves an international career. And Portugal deserves Deco for nurturing his wonderful talent.

Then there's Colin Kazim-Richards, a success on the right wing for Turkey and also a fantastic example - by accident rather than design - to other English-raised players of the beneficial effects of being prepared to move abroad to play your club football.

England, incidentally, have wonderful potential for tomfoolery here. The Premier League's internationalism has created a whole generation of middling footballers now qualified for the England team. Jérémie Aliadière, for example, is available for selection when needed. As is Steed Malbranque (former France Under-18 captain), who could possibly do a job on the left. Perhaps supported by Gaël Clichy, yet to play for France in a competitive international, but England-qualified later this year.

And of course England might even be at Euro 2008 if Steve McClaren had bitten the bullet and picked Carlo Cudicini instead of poor old nervous Scott Carson against Croatia at Wembley last November. Cudicini might well have turned it down, but Manuel Almunia won't when he gets his passport in December.

Does any of this matter? Certainly, Polish fans don't cheer any less for their country when Roger is in the team (more, perhaps, because they're more likely to win). But what about when they've got 11 Rogers out there?

Right now this process is more a curiosity, a quiz question, and a step up the career ladder for a few enterprising have-boots-will-travel aces. Probably it's all a function of economics and the inevitable global rise of the corporation (or club). Euro 2008 isn't really any the poorer for it. But what will Euro 2016 look like? Or Euro 2032? Who knows, by then we might have all been Rogered.
