It's quite hard to get a sense of what Andy "Petals" Flower is really like. Two months into his reign as the England cricket team's interim coach, the lingering impression is still of a small, frowning man in a hat. Flower himself has ambitions for something greater. In time he hopes to become a small, frowning man in a hat who is also permanent England coach. And sure enough there was a first glimpse of some self-reinvention taking place this week in Flower's description of one of his players, Ravi Bopara, as a batsman "with a high ceiling".

High ceilings: this is a new one. And this was a new kind of Flower, too, a world away even from the flinty, dab-sweeping run machine of his playing pomp. Here was a coach in the modern style, a man capable of minting with his vinegary soundbites a whole new world of high-end sporting aspiration.

It's a lovely idea too. Deep down we all like to think of ourselves as having a high ceiling, even as we flounce down the street in our broadest felt hat, the sole of our right shoe flapping, gesturing expansively, and lunching off fishpaste sandwiches on a pile of cardboard boxes outside Po£ndwrestler. A high ceiling, you see, that's us. Stand aside, high ceiling coming through.

High ceilings mean promise, swagger, and a rippling follow-through, even while in the process of fatally misreading the one-that-does-nothing from the left-arm part-time all-sorts man. We love the high ceiling man. We revere him. We pretend to be him while batting in the mirror with an umbrella and playing another – yet another – imperious, fizzing back-foot cover drive.

But at the same time we kind of hate him too. Mainly because the high ceiling merchant is in fact a familiar figure in English cricket, the shiny-suited second cousin of our old friends, the preening underachiever and the terribly frustrating career-long disappointment. Graeme Hick was supposed to have a high ceiling, but still spent his entire Test career bent double beneath his cobwebbed, yellowing woodchip firmament. Ian Bell appeared to have a high ceiling for a while, but it turned out just to be clever use of vertical stripes and a wiggly mirror from Ikea.

In the current team James Anderson has an air of the high ceiling, with his 90mph outswinger, his zip and his flex, but he's still not as good as Matthew Hoggard, who skulked about a portable low-slung ploughman's hovel with eye-level eaves and beams that chop you across the throat. Paul Collingwood, of course, has a confirmed low ceiling. We know this. We sigh heavily about it daily. He trudges and cowers, tunnels vole-like with that shovelling bottom hand. Gripped with claustro­phobia, he crouches out another hundred.

Still, you can see what Flower is up to. Every coach needs his "thing". Duncan Fletcher had his incredible sense of jowly foreboding, the rogue jungle general brooding darkly within his cave. Peter Moores had his impish, minor-1980s-Doctor-Who charm. With his talk of high ceilings Flower is giving us something new: the coach as estate agent. He promises us aspirational players with attractive period features. Here they come fluttering though the letter box. In need of some cosmetic updating. A little tired. Investment opportunity. Does a lot of clapping at slip. Hmm. Maybe we can make an offer.
