At one point during the opening match of Euro 2008 between Switzerland and the Czech Republic, the fan zone in Vienna's central Rathausplatz fell eerily silent. As the game gently meandered on gigantic screens at either end of the square, the only sound beyond the shrieks of the dreadful Austrian TV commentary was an embarrassed shuffling of feet. This, we'd all been told, was going to be non-stop fun. So why wasn't it? 

Eventually, the silence was broken by a group of Englishmen on a stag weekend breaking into obscene song about ''the three best things in Nottingham''. Very useful at times like these, the English.

Uefa has put a lot of store in its fan zones for this tournament. Uniformly gushing descriptions of the host cities' zones are oddly prominent in the official literature. Odd, because this kind of thing - the big screen, the temporary fencing, the funny hats and plastic beer glasses - has always been essentially peripheral to the main event. Not so in Austria and Switzerland, where the fan zone has been beefed up, made over and unveiled, rather optimistically, as part of the mainstream experience of Euro 2008.

European football's governing body is a strangely contorted bureaucracy. Its every utterance is mangled by a uniquely awkward brand of politically sensitive Eurospeak. If you listen carefully, the real meaning often starts to emerge: when the Uefa commercial director, Philippe Margraff, devoted the first half of his Euro 2008 introductory guide to a lyrical exposition of the "huge celebrations of football" that are the fan zones, you knew something was up.

The fact is, this tournament needs the fan zone like no other. Only the Ernst Happel stadium in Vienna has a capacity greater than 32,000. The rest of the host cities boast hastily tarted-up second-rank arenas. The fan zone brouhaha is an attempt to outflank this problem. 

In Vienna, at least one third of fans in the Rathuas fan zone on the opening night of the tournament were Turkish, unable to secure a ticket for their team's match in the 30,000 capacity Stade de Geneve. These were proper, travelling fans - rather than casual consumers - demoted to the spillover area. It's a poor second-best for what is supposed to be a tournament open to all.

There are other forces at work here. The Carlsberg-sponsored fan zones are yet another potent income stream for Uefa's many commercial partners: a drink of water in the Vienna fan zone costs a sensational €4.50 (£3.60). The entire area is ringed with official beer, sausage and useless tat suppliers, supported by some bargain-basement entertainment on the fan zone stage. 

And we shouldn't forget that TV loves the fan zone: that ersatz sense of glamorous event ''atmosphere'' all helps to dress up the live broadcast. The fan zone here in Vienna is surrounded by broadcasting platforms and interspersed with camera crews patrolling the crowds trying to coerce a Swiss into doing a silly dance for the camera (preferably with sponsored flag in view).

All of which is another step in the process of removing football from the actual live experience of people going to watch a match. ''Managed fun'' in a carefully controlled ''fun area'', in which approved modes of zany support are encouraged and even abetted (for a price), leaves a distinctly synthetic taste in the mouth. 

The game itself, at least, resists attempts to be managed in this way. During Switzerland's opener against the Czechs - a reassuringly old school game of few chances with little to hurl your jester's hat in the air about – huge sections of the fan zone simply sat on the floor and had a bit of a natter; or ate some expensive bratwurst; or, in large part, watched the genuinely exuberant Turks going through their repertoire of chants.

These Turkish supporters, you thought, deserve to be in a stadium. Austria and Switzerland's mid-ranking arenas may be desperately over-subscribed. But dressing up the fan zone is simply selling them short.
