This was a strange game in some ways. Celtic were outpassed and outmanoeuvred by Manchester United at Old Trafford, yet still emerged feeling justifiably hard done by. United's first two goals might well have been ruled out by the linesman. Still, the final scoreline didn't flatter the European champions. 

Dimitar Berbatov was the attacking star. Albeit at home and against a team of limited attacking ambition, this was a totally convincing, and totally committed display of centre forward play. Never mind the two close range (and probably offside) goals. For a man famed for not running much, he really did run a lot. 

This was Berbatov in motion: shuttling out to the right wing, chasing the full-backs down and always looking potent in possession. There were choice moments. The finish for the first goal was nifty. The control and sideswipe to Ronaldo after he had been tackled on the edge of the Celtic box in the first half were sublime – playground football from a man completely in control of what he wanted to do with the ball. 

Perhaps Berbatov had been stung into action by some of the superlatives being hurled at his striking partner. The transformation in Wayne Rooney's fortunes in the last month has been dramatic – not to mention hysterically received. Just five weeks ago, on Berbatov's United debut at Anfield, it was Rooney who found himself marginalised in a right-wing role. 

Never mind: eight goals in six games for club and country before tonight and suddenly Rooney was being described, in all seriousness, as the best player in the world. The truth, as ever, lies somewhere short of that. Being the best exceedingly promising creative English attacker in the Premier League will do for now. 

Here Rooney began the game forward of Berbatov, who came deep in search of the ball. It didn't last. Within the first quarter of an hour Rooney was already back in his own half taking the ball from his defence. He duly dropped into that withdrawn central position and by half time he'd begun to hum with now-familiar purpose. Another goal and an intermittently vibrant display confirmed his fine form. 

The corollary to Rooney's surging stock has been a rather over-egged collapse in confidence in last year's world-beater, Cristiano Ronaldo. He was again muted, a player visibly groping his way back after surgery. Murky body language or not, there's little to be gained from minutely analysing the performances of a player easing towards full fitness. He trudged and moped a bit, but that's just something Ronaldo does during games; even, at times, during those mesmeric away performances in Europe last year. 

It's away in the Champions League that you feel United will really derive benefit from their new centre-forward. Here Berbatov held the ball as much through Velcro control and sleight of foot as through bodily strength, slowing the play down and luring his team-mates forward to join him.

His finish for the first goal was subtle and deceptively easy – as well as offside. That was a shame for Celtic who had begun with intent and a quietly gathering confidence, so much so that it once again seemed strange they had managed to avoid victory in 18 precious Champions League away games. 

Was United's second goal offside? Certainly Berbatov was offside when Ronaldo hit the free-kick that was palmed out to him. Was Berbatov simply loitering, Ruud van Nistelrooy-style awaiting a second "phase of play" that began when Artur Boruc pushed the ball back? Certainly, it might easily have gone the other way and both Berbatov goals were very hard on Celtic. 

Before tonight Gordon Strachan voiced his concern that the team he put out might be on the short side. And so they were: short on possession and a touch short of ambition. 

Against this, Celtic were long on other things: spirit, energy and commitment. They lined up in a 4-4-1-1, with Shunsuke Nakamura and Scott Brown sporadically breaking forward to support Scott McDonald. In defence they provided a yellow-shirted scrimmage, a frantic, seething closing down of space thirty yards from goal. They did it well for periods in the first half and for all their massed defending did force the only two real saves of the first 20 minutes. Gary Caldwell had an excellent start in the anchor role sweeping in front of his defence. 

Still, these kinds of tactics rarely succeed in the Premier League at Old Trafford. By the hour mark, when Berbatov was withdrawn, it was already clear United would win this game. With Berbatov settling in to provide a genuine – and genuinely high-class – attacking focus, United have plenty to look forward to.
