An exciting trend has emerged among the rarefied trash-talk of English football's big-four mini-league. As the season enters its end-game, it has become fashionable to accuse other teams of being scared. Even Arsenal are at it. "We feel every team is scared of us as soon as we walk on the pitch," Theo Walcott trilled happily in midweek.

If the idea of Walcott being, not just good at running fast, but also scary seems unconvincing, there are good reasons for this. Firstly, anyone who tells you they're scary automatically isn't. It's a simple rule that also applies to many other things, like being modest, hard, congenitally mute or a really good laugh. Secondly, this Arsenal team simply aren't scary. Even while they're beating you 7–0 and providing a perfect expression of high-speed, multi-directional, frictionless total football, they fail to engender fear.

We know when things are scary. The Leeds United 1989–90 team were scary: a platoon of furiously muscle-bound, tiny-shorted, spittle-flecked moustaches. Phil Spector is scary. Any major financial transaction is scary, right down to spending more than £19.99 on a pair of shoes, perhaps one that comes inside a tissue-lined box rather than hanging limply from a rail in one of those oddly listless high street shops called Footboxx or Shoopit.

Arsenal are now the opposite of this. They twirl and pirouette. They don't so much beat you as expertly persuade you to lose. The idea that Walcott might decide instead to overpower or give the willies to the Chelsea defence in this afternoon's FA Cup semi-final seems not just wrong-headed but also impossible.

Even as a neutral, you can't help feeling a chest-tightening attachment to the current litter of young Gunners. They're so full of hope. We were there when they first came into the world. We held them, shivering and slippery, against our heaving breast. Now we want to see them leap and prance and eventually grow awkward and gangly, develop a bum-fluff moustache, fall in love, become sulky and distant, maybe in time realise that they're gay, go to Thailand, come back with an infuriatingly superior attitude, spend their university years wearing a poncho, then, unexpectedly, get a job as a tax lawyer in Bristol, meet a girl your wife doesn't take to, and end up appearing every three months in order to sit in coiled resentment over lunch, while you try to remember not to talk about things on the news you don't understand.

But perhaps we can forgive Theo as he's just going with the flow. Last week Rafael Benítez announced, craftily, that Sir Alex Ferguson was "a little bit scared" of both Liverpool and Chelsea. This sounds more plausible, if only because Benítez is genuinely quite scary, in the manner of the inoffensive-looking nerdy bloke who turns out to have all sorts of tricky repartee and reserves of malevolent energy when you absentmindedly pick a minor quarrel with him, perhaps in an overheated department store queue.

On the other hand, Ferguson really doesn't seem to be scared of Arsenal. He has even been frothing with polite anticipation ahead of their Champions League semi-final, almost as though he wouldn't mind losing to them that much, an experience comparable to being tickled to death by Fiona Bruce or savagely beaten up by Stephen Fry. It's a rare charm. Don't wish it away, Theo.
