Milton Keynes has always been an unusual kind of place. It's a project city, a miniature land of opportunity, a place where nothing has had the chance to grow old yet. Sweeping along its thrillingly comprehensive ring-road network, you find yourself hypnotised by the looming silhouettes of the retail park armada. There's IKEA, TK Maxx, Argos. And next up - Stadium MK, home of the MK Dons. From a distance Buckinghamshire's chief football arena could easily be mistaken for just another skeletal out-of-town leisure dome. Detached, spacious, hastily landscaped, there's something of the ghost ground about it. Unsurprisingly, this all still looks very much like a work in progress.

Four years into the MK era, the club now has its second high profile – and in this case wholly unexpected - new manager. At first glance it is tempting to ask what the Dons' publicity-seeking chairman Pete Winkelman first saw in charismatic, world famous, ex-Chelsea player Roberto Di Matteo. All cynicism aside, lounging in the upper tiers of Clubhouse MK – just down the road from Stadium MK and with a commanding view of Training Ground MK – Di Matteo certainly doesn't look, or sound, like your everyday League One manager. For a start he lists his chief role model, and most beloved former coach, as Arrigo Sacchi, under whom he played for Italy.

"Sacchi had the most effect on me," he says. "He was a great coach, a really great coach to play under. You respected him at all times. It felt like having a teacher. He would teach you what to do, to improve as a player or to improve the team. It was a change from the old fashioned style."

Which is one thing they already have in common. Appointed in July this year, Di Matteo was without doubt the division's marquee summer signing. More than just a surprise choice, this looked like an aspirational gesture, a statement of intent, by a club still suffering the status anxiety of the parvenu.

Not that you'd know it talking to the man himself. Asked about the
pressures of taking charge at a club marginally less famous than himself, Di Matteo seems unfazed. "I guess it gives the club some exposure," he yawns. "People want to talk to me. It's good publicity. I'm used to it. I played in the Premier League for years. It's been my life. Let me tell you Italy wasn't really easy either."

Two months into the season Di Matteo can afford to appear almost alarmingly relaxed. Despite Tuesday's 2-1 defeat at home to Stockport, his Dons are lurking in seventh place. Their away form, in particular, has been impressive, with three wins and 12 goals. It's been a largely seamless start - perhaps surprisingly so for a promoted club led by a man who never played at third-tier level throughout his career in Switzerland, Italy and England.

There's an obvious question here about the culture shock of finding yourself Di Matteo of the Dons. Never mind nationality, Di Matteo comes from the Premier League - and they do things differently there. "People told me I would find it difficult to work with players at this level," he says. "But I didn't. The principles are the same, you just have to adapt and talk to the players.

"The fact is a lot of teams here tend to focus on set-pieces because they lack a bit of quality and they tend to hit the long ball and be very direct. Crewe play good football but they're all still six foot or more. You must be ready to work hard and fight."

This is a reminder that Di Matteo has long since absorbed the standard buffetings of the overseas footballer. Unusually for the times, he was 26 when he moved to Chelsea from Lazio in 1996, an elegant box-to-box midfielder, an Italy international and still very much in his prime. "To be honest it was more of a shock for the players who were here when we arrived," he says now. "Dennis Wise, for example, it really opened his eyes when we came. The way you look after yourself. In Italy we trained five days a week, here you did four. We used to do extra training."

Di Matteo made 175 appearances for Chelsea and scored in three victorious domestic cup finals. He was forced to retire in 2002 after breaking his leg, but stayed on in west London: in 12 years there he has accumulated a wife-to-be, three children and two restaurants. This is perhaps the most anglicised of all the Premier League's early imports. Still, the move into managing was something of a leap. Di Matteo had taken his basic coaching badges alongside Gus Poyet, but wasn't actively pursuing a managerial career when the Dons came calling.

"It was a bit of a surprise," he admits, looking pretty much unsurprisable. "I was doing some TV work in Switzerland for Euro 2008. I thought, yeah, let me go for the interview. Sounds interesting, an ambitious club. I was curious to see how it worked. By the second interview I got the job and my life changed dramatically. No holiday. Pre-season. Hard work."

There's that culture shock, too, something that works both ways here. Most of Di Matteo's players have never had a foreign manager. His assistant Eddie Newton joined from the Chelsea youth set-up, a definitively Premier League operation. At the Dons it's been a question of taking things gently.

"I try to make the training sessions enjoyable," Di Matteo says. "Then you perform better. In every job it's the same. We haven't had any resistance from the players. You just have to adapt a little. For example, in an exercise in possession, instead of one or two touch, we do three touches. That's the difference. I'm sure we can progress it later on, when they get more used to it."

"And we're working on fitness. They're applying themselves very well and we're slowly increasing the workload. We explained why we're doing it and the advantages. It was a bit different, but now they're more used to it."

Uneasily, thoughts turn to issues such as discipline, curfews, diet and the traditional football league team bonding session. Has the new man had to introduce any draconian, Serie A-style rules about his players' off-field habits?

"I'm not a policeman," he shrugs. "I don't know what they do when they're not here, but the regime was already quite good. They seem reasonable about what they do on a Saturday night. I discourage [going out drinking], but everyone's old enough to know."

One thing Di Matteo would like to do is bring through some of the club's younger players. "I would love it," he says, appearing mildly enervated for the first time. "But I might not be in the job at Christmas if I try now. We've got a couple of young kids who are very talented, so who knows. I think we're doing the right stuff with them here. I'm very confident these couple of young players will develop."

Typically enough for a man schooled in the professional caginess of the Premier League, Di Matteo won't name any names ("because then we'll have scouts down here"), but the fact remains that, despite having a very visible chairman, the Dons still don't have a particularly wealthy one. Youth may be the best way of bolstering his limited squad. Despite gaining promotion last year net summer spending amounted to minus £1.3m, with Keith Andrews following former manager Paul Ince to Blackburn.

In truth Ince's presence does still loom rather over the Dons. He made a success of this group of players and remains very popular locally. Asked about the pressures of succeeding the previous upwardly-mobile incumbent at the MK Dons academy for the managerial arts, Di Matteo seems largely unimpressed. "After I signed I gave him a ring. We had a quick chat. I wished him luck. Once you work and you train with the team you make your own assessments I don't look at other people. Everyone writes his own history."

It's a fitting sentiment. The Dons are a club who have done exactly this, concocting an identity out of a new ground, a logo and a franchised membership of the Football League. Perhaps, with this in mind, Di Matteo might actually be the perfect choice here. This is an unusually intelligent and unapologetically ambitious novice manager: asked if he wants to coach in the Premier League Di Matteo says "Absolutely" and just leaves it at that.

Elevation to the Premier League, with its compliant overseas billionaires and vine ripe TV fortunes, is the founding ethos of the MK Dons project. Who knows, they might even make it in the end. Although, you get the feeling the manager might just beat them to it.
