Oh dear. Not quite sure how it came to this. But here we are, a full two days after the end of the party, and the Mill finds itself still staggering around the deserted marquee, swigging at fag-butt-infused cans of lager, still wearing its best purple velveteen disco flares and still bang up for it. Where did everybody go anyway? Come on, stop pretending to be asleep. What's wrong with you all?

Sure, the Mill has heard the muttered voices. We know what they're saying. It's time for the Mill to just settle down and accept that the window was fun, but people change, people move on. Maybe the Mill could meet someone special and settle down. And above all stop making feverish small talk about the story in today's Sun about Big Phil Scolari using his jinky lightweight Portuguese loan signing Ricardo Quaresma as "bait" in a bid to flog Didier Drogba to Inter.

Who knows. Perhaps the Mill could join a gym and spend its evenings staying in and watching its DVD box set of The Wire. At times the Mill even finds itself wondering. But then, you know, along comes the Sun's hot news of Cristiano Ronaldo buying a hotel on a Portuguese island where he already owns four houses: "One of the lads joked he should be called Ronopoly". How the evenings must fly by for the lads.

And there we are, the Mill's off again. Window? It's a window every day around here. Don't you realise that Craig Gordon is holding "clear the air talks" with Ricky Sbragia after what the Sun describes as "a Jekyll and Hyde 18 months"? "I've just told him to carry on with what he's been doing," Sbragia says. "Apart from the bits where he eerily transforms himself into a snarling Victorian morphine addict."

And there's more. Sort of. In the Daily Star, Gary Lineker's girlfriend has been roped in to appearing in his frankly embarrassing crisp adverts. The new ones star "Gary as a cop breaking up a fight between flavours. He then poses as a Bollywood star for the Onion Bhaji ad". Gary Lineker is 48 years old. OK, maybe it's not strictly a rumour. But if you soak it in vodka, put it inside an improvised plastic pipe and inhale it through water it definitely makes you cough a lot.

Elsewhere, according to the Mirror, Niall Quinn spent large stretches of transfer window deadline day "laughing off" Newcastle's apparently genuine interest in paying Kieran Richardson money to play football. Stop it Quinny. No, stop it. And Coventry chairman Ray Ranson could barely contain his hilarity at Joe Kinnear's £1.3m bid for Danny Fox. "It wouldn't pay for his big toe!" Ranson sniggered, sewing Fox's big toe back on and simultaneously trying to stop carrots shooting out of his own nose.

The failed transfer bid chairman-sneer follow-up story: who needs actual things that might actually happen? Nobody, when goal.com are reporting the findings of a German research company called Transfermarkt that Chelsea have the most valuable squad in world football, closely followed by Barcelona. Then Man United. Then Real Madrid. Then AC Milan. Good old Transfermarkt, eh?

And still in things-that-didn't-happen news the Mill can report that peculiarly embattled German Kevin Kuranyi not only didn't move to Blackburn, he also didn't want to move to Blackburn. "I won't run away from my problems," he announced from behind his pencil-thin sculpted beard, drawing no great sympathy from the Mill who, in the last 24 hours, has run away from bailiffs, a scary noise in the wardrobe, feelings of frustration and loneliness, and not being able to get past level three on classic Tetris.

Rudi Völler has announced that he won't be swapping his Bayer Leverkusen goalie René Adler for someone called Toni Kroos, who, to the Mill's jaded ear, sounds like the teenage heart-throb star of a glamorous 1980s German soap opera destined to end up bloated and re-habbed and confined to special interest over-the-hill celebrity supermarket check-out magazines. "It's obvious that this line of business produces such rumours but in this case it is absolute nonsense," Völler announced, still feverishly trying to claw Frank Rijkaard's gob out of his straggly mullet.

In contrived and entirely speculative jigsawed-together foreign non-news, Calciomercato have got Milan actually offering 30m euros for the hobbling, bandy-legged but oddly effective David Beckham. And this just in (yesterday): Australia's Newcastle Jets have signed 33-year-old striker Sasho Petrovski from Central Coast Mariners. There. Still plenty going on. Let's just turn the music up a little bit. Come on, on your feet. Wake up.

