It's amazing what a little success can do. Currently Brentford are sitting second in League Two, a club on course for its first promotion in 10 years. You can tell too. There's a buzz around the club's Osterley training ground and a sense of bustle among the echoey changing rooms, the random items of weight-training ­apparatus, the boots and bandages and cups of tea. This is a club ever so ­cautiously going places.

Last season I got to spend a morning here as Brentford's acting assistant coach: mucking in on the training pitch, stacking the cones, standing around with my hands on my hips, tripping over my great flapping XXXL Brentford tracksuit bottoms. That kind of thing. So it's with a certain sense of pride that I can report the lads have obviously taken a lot from that experience, and are currently six points behind leaders Wycombe with a game in hand. Really, I'm proud of them all.

"We're probably a little bit ahead of where we felt we would be," Bees manager Andy Scott says, scanning his early- morning emails in his office before training. Terry Bullivant, my successor as permanent assistant coach, isn't in today and it's with a vague sense of regret at what might have been that I take his empty seat. "We've changed a lot of personnel, but the players that have come in have gone from strength to strength."

This time last season Scott was picking up the reins following a disastrous interlude under Terry Butcher and looked like a tyro manager with a thousand pressing tasks to attend to: hastily Blu-Tacking a playing and coaching staff into place with one hand, clearing Butcher's half-eaten sandwiches off his desk with the other and, above all, desperately hunting for time to stabilise a club that had nosedived through relegation, heavy debt and four managers within the previous year.

A period of rapid turnover was in train, with 22 players passing through the Brentford first-team squad in a year via a tornado of loans, cheap purchases and off-loadings. The most impressive Scott signing so far has been Charlie McDonald, a 27-year-old striker sneaked on a free from Southend, who has 11 goals so far this season. But this is basically management on the hoof, an ad hoc, day-to-day affair at the very sharpest end of the Football League.

Scott does at least seem much more settled. This season, after a start that saw Brentford lose their first two matches, there has even been time for a little managerial tinkering "We have adapted our playing style a bit. We were playing good stuff at the start of the season and not picking up points. We had a couple of defeats and after that we had a good look at how we were playing and the mistakes we were making."

Does this mean he's given in to the lurking temptation of the lower tiers to play the percentage ball, stick it in the mixer and find out if they like it up 'em? "We kept the same formation, we just changed the mindset. We looked at what the successful sides who had come up out of this division were doing, compared to what we were doing. We made it a lot more solid."

There's a resilience about the team, demonstrated most recently by last Saturday's 1-1 home draw with Notts County, a game decorated with another hair-tearing decision by the referee Stuart Attwell – he of the "ghost goal" at Watford earlier in the season. This time Atwell sent off Nathan Elder after eight minutes for a perceived elbowing offence, a decision that left many observers bemused, Scott included.

"The ball was in the air, my player was back-peddling, not looking at their player, there was a coming together, he's a 6ft 3in centre-forward and their defender went down.

"There was nothing malicious or intentional. You just want to be able to play the game. We had a good crowd of paying customers in. If it was a bad tackle, then fair enough. Refs are quick to get their cards out now."

Elder, who was also sent off on his last appearance last year, now faces the prospect of a five-match ban. Scott isn't alone in finding it slightly bizarre that a referee who makes an obvious mistake should be "punished" by being sent to referee matches at this level.

"Our rules are exactly the same as the rules in the Premier League. It's still three points at stake and our livelihood still depends on it. If a ref makes a mistake and they're punished by being sent to League Two, is it possible for them to have a clear head in that situation? I think they should be taken out of it for a bit."

Brentford's success this season has been built around a youthful and extremely fit squad of players. "We've got a young squad and we want to keep it together without too much chopping and changing form season to season. If we do go up it's a money thing what you do from there. Leicester, Leeds, Peterborough, maybe even Charlton or Norwich if they come down, there are a lot of clubs with money in League One. Pushed to name his most promising youngsters, Scott plumps for his energetic left-flank of Karleigh Osborne and Sam Wood: "They're good players and they want to improve all the time. Sam Wood came to us form Bromley and he's done very well with his first chance in the League."

Much like, so far, his manager. Scott played at a higher level. He was part of Howard Wilkinson's Sheffield United team that reached the 1997 play-off final for a place in the Premier League (they lost to Crystal Palace). It's quite possible his ambitions reach beyond away trips to Macclesfield, Brentford's next destination this coming Saturday. "I'd be a liar if I said I didn't want to manage at a higher level," he shrugs. "But the players are ambitious too and hopefully we can have success as a group. That's what you build your reputation on."
