Rushing into IVF may do more harm than good, a leading fertility expert has warned.
Research shows that women who start fertility treatment after a year of trying for a baby naturally are only slightly more likely to conceive than those who let nature take its course. 

However, they are far more likely to have twins or triplets, raising the risk of ill-health for both mother and baby. 

 
Many young women would be better off improving fertility through simpler means such as cutting stress levels and losing weight, said Dr Geeta Nargund. 

Dr Nargund, head of reproductive medicine at St George's Hospital in Tooting, South London, created a computer programme with the help of Dutch academics that simulated the fate of 100,000 women trying to have babies. 

It compared the odds of those who tried to conceive naturally with those who waited a year to have IVF and those who waited three years. 





Although those who had IVF were more likely to have a baby, the difference in birth rate was small. This is because many of the women who didn't conceive naturally in the first year, did do so over time. 

Using IVF, in which more than one embryo is often implanted at a time, also greatly raises the number of twins and triplets, who are much more likely to be born prematurely and less likely to survive the first week of life. 

They also have a much higher risk of cerebral palsy, while the mother-to-be has higher than usual odds of life-threatening complications. 


Meanwhile, the procedure itself can be traumatic and cost up to £15,000 a try. 

Dr Nargund said: 'We must offer lifestyle advice, early tests and simple approaches to promote natural conception. 

'If a woman is younger and has no serious medical causes of infertility, she should consider improving her fertility naturally. 

IVF is safe but what we are saying is you don't want unnecessary medical treatment far too early.' 

Her study concluded that IVF was an 'excellent treatment for couples who have little or no chance of a natural pregnancy'. 

In Britain, women have to wait around three years before receiving IVF on the NHS. However, the vast majority of couples go private. 

Susan Seenan, of charity Infertility Network UK, said the right time to undergo treatment must be decided on a case-by-case basis. 

Professor Bill Ledger, a fertility expert from Sheffield University, added: 'IVF is unpleasant and stressful and should not be done if there is a reasonable chance of a natural conception. 

'However there is a balance to be struck. As a woman passes 30 chances of a conception and live birth from IVF begin to fall, and fall more steeply after 35. 

'It's also pointless to wait long if there is an obvious infertility cause - for example a partner with a very low sperm count.' 

He added that theoretical models should be viewed with caution and that new restrictions had been put in place to cut the number of risky multiple births. 

