But big bottoms could ultimately be good for your health. 

Research shows that the fat in buttocks and hips may protect against type 2 diabetes. 

 
When such fat from mice was injected into other mice their bodies more easily used the blood sugar-regulating hormone insulin and they lost weight. 

The researchers from the Harvard Medical School in the U.S. believe that human fat could be used to make a drug that has the same effect on us, preventing diabetes. 

The scientists monitored the health of mice given transplants of subcutaneous fat, the type that accumulates under the skin of hips and bottom, creating a 'pear shape'. When it was inserted deep into the tummy area, the creatures lost weight and their fat cells shrank. 

They were also able to make better use of insulin, the hormone implicated in diabetes, the journal Cell Metabolism reports. 

Transplanting the fat into their bottom did not have such a dramatic effect. And giving the creatures extra fat from the tummy area made no difference to their health. 

 

Researcher Dr Ronald Kahn said it was clear that the two types of fat had different properties. He said: 'The surprising thing was that it wasn't where the fat was located, it was the kind of fat that was the most important variable. 

'Even more surprising, it wasn't that abdominal fat was exerting negative effects, but that subcutaneous fat was producing a good effect. 

'I think it's an important result because not only does it say that not all fat is bad, but I think it points to a special aspect of fat where we need to do more research.' 

Researchers have known for some time that fat which collects in the abdomen  -  giving an 'apple shape'  -  can raise a person's risk of developing type 2 diabetes and heart disease, while those with pear-shaped bodies are less prone to these disorders. 

Now it turns out that fat responsible for the pear shape may be actively protecting them from disease, perhaps by releasing certain hormones. The Harvard team is now trying to work out what these hormones are. 'If we can capture those (substances), we might have an opportunity to convert them into drugs or use them as guides to help develop drugs,' said Dr Kahn. 

There are fears that soaring levels of obesity will fuel a diabetes timebomb, with more than four million Britons suffering from the condition by 2025. 

More than 2.3million in the UK already have diabetes. Long-term complications can include heart disease and kidney failure. Obesity experts warn that today's children risk dying at a younger age than their parents
