A spray that might stop flu in its tracks is being developed by scientists. 

It would fight off all strains of the virus, including those behind bird flu and winter flu. 

Researchers at St Andrews University are developing a nasal spray that would stop people from being infected when the bug is circulating. 

Flu kills up to 22,000 Britons a year. 

A pandemic of the human form of bird flu  -  which many believe is inevitable  -  could claim 700,000 lives in the UK alone. 

The current flu jab protects only three-quarters of those vaccinated and needs to be reformulated each year to keep on top of changes in the virus's appearance. 

Anti-flu drugs that attack the bug are available. But they are mainly used to treat the infection and the virus can mutate to become resistant to treatment.
The one-size-fits-all spray works in a different way.
Instead of attacking the bug directly, it latches on to the cells it infects, stopping the virus from taking hold. 


Usually, the flu virus enters the cells of our nose, throat and lungs by locking on to a sugar sticking out from their surface. 

Once inside, the virus rapidly multiplies, before bursting its way out, killing the cells in the process. 

Scientists at St Andrews have created a range of proteins that bind to the sugar, stopping the flu bug in its tracks. 

Targeting the sugar rather than the virus itself means the bug is unlikely to become resistant to the drug, say the researchers. 

And as all strains of flu use the same sugar  -  sialic acid  -  when infecting cells, the protein-based drug should ward off all types of the disease. 

Following promising initial lab tests, the researchers have received funding to move on to animal tests. 

If these prove successful, the technology could be sold to a drugs firm and a nasal spray could be on the market in less than ten years. 

Researcher Professor Garry Taylor-said: 'There are two drugs currently used for the treatment of influenza but the virus has become resistant to one of these. We think we can mask the sugars long enough for the virus not to be able to get a foothold. 

'We envisage it would be given as an aerosol, a bit like an asthma inhaler because you want to get it into the respiratory tract quickly. But there is a long way to go.' 

Professor Malcolm McCrae, a Warwick University virologist, advised caution. 

He said: 'I would ask them how long this is going to work for and how much people are going to have to take.' 

But John Oxford, Britain's leading flu expert, said the spray could potentially stop people from catching flu all together. 

Professor Oxford, of Queen Mary's School of Medicine in London, said: 'If you could cover all the sugars like a blanket and they remain covered, it would stop you from catching flu.' 
