Feeling miserable about piling on the pounds after Christmas? Then lighten up. . . and lighten up. 

Scientists have calculated that an hour of laughter can burn off as many calories as 30 minutes of weightlifting. 

And following that routine for a year could lead to a loss of around 11lbs  -  the equivalent of a dress size. 

 
A burst of hearty laughter provides the body with a 'mini-aerobic workout', according to neuroscientist Dr Helen Pilcher. 

It makes the heart beat faster and boosts blood flow around the body, she says. 

The chest is forced to rise and fall, while the abdominal muscles have to work hard to 
keep up, tightening the tummy. And the benefits don't end there. Laughter requires help from at least 15 facial muscles, keeping them supple and the skin glowing. 

It also boosts levels of feelgood endorphins and cuts stress. 


Other studies show laughter to be beneficial for the heart, boosting circulation as much as exercise or cholesterol-lowering drugs. 

Even the anticipation of a belly laugh or two appears to be good for the health. 

It is enough to lift our spirits and boost the immune system, with effects lasting for up to 24 hours. 

Dr Pilcher, who also works as a comedian, said: 'We're not advocating you watch sitcoms 24 hours a day, but laughing away excess Christmas weight is a great way to stay in shape. 

'But you've got to avoid the temptation of consuming extra calories whilst you are laughing  -  chomping on a Kit Kat or supping a quick half whilst watching your favourite sitcom.' 

Dr Pilcher's research found an hour of strong laughter works off around 100 calories  -  the equivalent of a small chocolate bar or a bag of Wotsits crisps. 

Less fun ways of burning the same amount of energy include a half hour of weightlifting or 40 minutes of hoovering. 

She calculated an hour of laughter burns off half an ounce of fat, so giggling away for an hour a day for a year could rid the body of just over 11lbs. 

Likewise, a daily half-hour dose of comedy  -  the equivalent of an episode of Friends or The Office  -  could leave you more than 5lbs lighter over the year. 

Paul Moreton, of UKTV Gold, which commissioned the analysis, said: 'The Daily Laughter Diet is a fun alternative to joining a gym. 

'Gold has a schedule packed full of comedy classics. So reach for your remote, not the leftovers.' 

