From interfering to molly-coddling, mother-in-laws have long made life a misery.
But beleaguered daughter-in-laws may have the last laugh, with research showing the menopause may be their revenge.
Cambridge and Exeter University scientists believe the menopause is nature's way of diffusing the tension that arises when a younger, prettier and fertile woman arrives in the family.
 
If both generations of women have children, there will be competition for food, money and love, all of which may be in short supply.
But if the mother-in-law bows out, the younger woman will have free reign to spoil her children.
The more children the daughter-in-law has, and the healthier they are, the more likely it is that her genes will live on.
The older woman, however, will not lose out entirely, as by helping bring up her grandchildren, she will help safeguard the future of her own genes.
In other words, daughter-in-laws may be to blame for the menopause, this week's New Scientist states.
Exeter University researcher Dr Michael Cant said recently: 'When more than one female breeds, every mouth you feed is one less for your own.
'One of our characteristics is we share food among family members, but having another female producing a baby means the offspring are competing for food and helpers for years.

 
How living with the mother-in-law can damage a woman's health 

'It it comes down to a choice between breeding and helping with other children, the younger women has nothing to gain because she is not related to anyone in the group.
'But the older female can help to rear her grandchildren.  It gives the younger female the advantage.  She's going to breed no matter what.'
He added that theory helps explain why women go through menopause much earlier in life than most other members of the animal kingdom.
Others argue that menopause evolved to allow women to spoil their grandchildren.
Studies have shown that having a granny at hand to lavish a newborn with love and attention greatly increases a baby's chance of survival.
The grandmother also benefits, as by nurturing her grandchildren, she safeguards the survival of her genes without having to go through the trauma of childbirth again.
A third theory states that menopause is a way of ensuring women become mothers while they are still young , cutting the risk of them dying while their children are unable to fend for themselves.
But Dr Cant said: 'The sums don't add up - the benefits aren't sufficient to stop breeding.'
In the UK, the average age for the menopause - defined as the time when a woman's periods have stopped for 12 months - is 52.
However, one per cent of British women go through the menopause before they hit 40, with some girls hitting the menopause after just one period.
Timing of menopause is largely genetic, although weight, having children and the age a woman starts her periods all have an effect.
