A diet pill that could be twice as effective as any on the market is under development. 
The once-a-day tablet targets the part of the brain that controls appetite, cutting the urge to snack and making people feel full sooner, say scientists. 
Taken for six months, tesofensine produces an average weight loss of a stone and a half  -  double that of existing diet drugs. 
The University of Copenhagen researchers looked at how tesofensine affected the weight of more than 200 men and women. 
They took the drug or a placebo for six months, while eating slightly less food than usual. 
Medium-strength pills  -  the variety most likely to be marketed  -  produced an average weight loss of almost 10 per cent. 
On average, this equates to a stone and a half  -  the equivalent of two dress sizes. 
Patients taking the pills were eight times as likely to lose this amount as those on the dummy pills, the Lancet medical journal reports. 
Professor Astrup, president of the International Association for the Study of Obesity, said: 'We were quite astonished when we saw the results. It is extremely promising.' 
The drug, which was originally developed to treat Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, alters levels of three brain chemicals involved in appetite control  -  serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline. 




However, tesofensine, which is around three years from the market, does have side- effects, including nausea, diarrhoea, constipation and insomnia. 
Some volunteers suffered mood changes, feeling more angry or confused than normal. 
Professor Steve O'Rahilly, a Cambridge University obesity expert, said: 'If we could treat obesity, like we treat high blood pressure, with safe, effective and affordable drugs this would be an enormous boon to health care. 
'To date, obesity drugs that have been effective have not been safe, and conversely those that are safer, are relatively ineffective. The results with this new drug demonstrate that, over a six-month period, it is quite effective. 
'However, as the drug is likely to have actions on parts of the brain not involved in weight control, the risk of serious side effects on longer-term administration will need to be watched very carefully.' 
Adult obesity rates have nearly quadrupled in the past 25 years, making Britain the second-fattest nation in the developed world, trailing behind only America. 
The problem is not confined to adults, with 10 per cent of six-year-olds and 17 per cent of 15-year-olds now obese. 
The large loss of weight would also cut the risk of heart disease, diabetes and cancer, experts say. 
While it is too early to say how much tesofensine would cost, the obesity drugs already on the market  -  Acomplia, Reductil and Xenical  -  are no more than &pound;2 a day. 
Professor Astrup said larger-scale trials of tesofensine were likely to start next year. 
He added that encouraging users to lose weight before taking the tablets and to eat sensibly and exercise while taking them could lead to even more pounds being shed. 
'You could easily come up to 20 per cent weight loss which could offer an alternative to the surgical treatment of obesity,' he said.
