Scientists have unlocked the secrets of the most widely-used breast cancer drug in a breakthrough that could save thousands of lives. 
Understanding how tamoxifen works  -  and why it stops working for some patients  -  could lead to better treatment of the disease that kills more than 1,000 women a month. 
Tests to identify women likely to become resistant to the drug could be available in just five years, the British researchers said. They would then be offered alternative therapy. 
Researcher Dr Jason Carroll said: 'Given that tamoxifen is such a widely-prescribed drug for the treatment of breast cancer, understanding how it works and what happens when it fails is absolutely critical in making better drugs.' 
Tamoxifen is given to up to 28,000 of the 45,000 women who develop breast cancer each year, to help prevent the cancer returning after surgery to remove a tumour. 

But in up to 35 per cent of cases, or 9,000 women, the drug does not work properly and the disease returns.

The scientists, from Cancer Research UK's Cambridge Research Institute, uncovered the chain of events that allows tumours to become resistant to the drug. 
A protein called Pax2 was shown to play a key role in switching off a gene that allows cancer cells to grow and divide.

When Pax2 is faulty, the gene stays switched on and the body becomes resistant to tamoxifen, the journal Nature reports. 

Dr Carroll said: 'This is an absolutely critical effect. We knew that women developed resistance to tamoxifen but previously our understanding of why this occurred could be compared to trying to fix a broken car without knowing how the engine worked. 
'Now we understand how all the engine parts operate and we can try to think about better ways to make repairs.' 
Professor David Lane, Cancer Research UK's chief scientist, said: 'Tamoxifen has been a huge success story, helping to prevent breast cancer recurring for many women. 
'Understanding why it occasionally stops working is really important because it allows us to identify new targets for drug development and who will need such treatments.' 
Although faulty Pax2 may not explain every case of resistance to tamoxifen, it is thought to be behind a 'large number' of cases. 
Tamoxifen has been the gold standard treatment for breast cancer since the 1980s. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in the UK. 

Almost 12,500 women die from the disease each year. 
