Prince Charles has been accused of ‘ exploiting a gullible public’ by putting his name to a detox treatment. 
Professor Edzard Ernst, Britain’s top expert on complementary medicine, said the £10 Duchy Herbals Detox Tincture relied on ‘ superstition and quackery’ rather than science. 
Nicknaming the range ‘Dodgy Originals’ after the Prince’s Duchy Originals brand, Prof Ernst said that using herbal potions to detoxify the body was ‘implausible, unproven and dangerous’. 
 
The £10 tincture was launched last month as part of the Prince’s range of luxury organic products. 
Customers are advised to add a few drops of the dandelion and artichoke solution to a glass of water twice a day. 
Combined with a balanced diet, it is claimed, the product will help the body cleanse itself of ‘toxins’ and aid digestion. 
But Prof Ernst, a complementary medicine researcher at Exeter University and a former homeopathic doctor, said there is no evidence that the tincture works. 
He said: ‘I know everything about artichoke that there is to know. There is a hint it might lower cholesterol to a very minor degree, but that’s all. 
‘And there is nothing to know about dandelion. They say they have produced it to the highest standards, and that may be so. But high quality nonsense is still nonsense.’ 
The professor warned that detox products could be dangerous if they were viewed as a ‘quick fix’ to unhealthy habits. 
He said yesterday: ‘Prince Charles contributes to the ill-health of the nation by pretending we can all over-indulge and then take his tincture and be fine again. 

'Under the banner of holistic and integrative healthcare he promotes a “quick fix” and outright quackery. 
‘Prince Charles and his advisors seem to deliberately ignore science and prefer to rely on makebelieve and superstition. 
‘Prince Charles thus financially exploits a gullible public in a time of financial hardship.This comes from somebody who should know better and from somebody who arguably should not be deluding the nation and contributing to its ill-health.’ 
Prof Ernst added that those who do over-indulge should simply drink lots of water, take exercise and get some rest. 
The Duchy Originals website states: ‘HRH The Prince of Wales… believes poor health does not exist in isolation, but is in fact a direct consequence of our lifestyles, cultures, communities and how we interact with our environments. 
‘He is passionate about adopting an integrated approach to health, as well as exploring how safe, proven complementary therapies can work in conjunction with mainstream medicine.’ 
A Duchy Originals spokesman said the tincture satisfied ‘all of the relevant sections of both UK and European food laws’. 
Andrew Baker, the firm’s chief executive officer said: ‘It is a natural aid to digestion and supports the body’s natural elimination processes. 
‘It is not – and has never been described as – a medicine, remedy or cure for any disease.’ 
He added: ‘Duchy Herbals Detox Tincture contains globe artichoke and dandelion which both have a long history of traditional use for aiding digestion. 
‘We find it unfortunate that Professor Ernst should chase sensationalist headlines in this way rather than concentrating on accuracy and objectivity.’ 
Nelsons Organic Pharmacy, which makes the tincture for Duchy Originals, said that artichoke and dandelion had been used for hundreds of years to aid digestion. 
Its chairman, Robert Wilson, said: We do not believe this product encourages ill-health through over-indulgence.’ 
