Tiny 'ping pong balls' could hold the key to healing the damage caused by stroke, scientists believe.

British researchers have used biodegradable balls, just one-tenth of a millimetre in diameter, to ferry stem cells into stroke-damaged brains.
The balls anchored the stem cells in the right place and within a week, healthy new tissue grew.
Although scientists have had some success using stem cells to treat stroke, the cells have tended to ooze out into healthy parts of the brain, cutting their benefit.
The new technique ensures they stay where they are needed.
Researcher Dr Mike Modd, of the Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, said: 'We would expect to see a much better improvement in the outcome after a stroke if we can fully replace the lost brain tissue, and that is what we have been able to do with our technique.'
The stem cells were attached to the 'ping pong balls' and injected into the brain through a very fine needle.

The balls, which were made of a biodegradable polymer, gradually broke down as the stem cells made new tissue, the journal Biomaterials reports.

The scientists now plan to add a cocktail of nutrients into the mix to encourage blood vessels to grow.

In the use of the balls,or 'scaffold' is perfected, they could be used to improve the stem cell treatment of stroke patients.

Professor Douglas Kell, of the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, which funded the study, said: 'Stroke is a leading cause of disability in industrialised countries. 

'It is reassuring to know that the technology for treating stroke by repairing brain damage is getting ever closer to translation into the clinic. 

'This crucial groundwork by Dr Modo and his colleagues will surely be a solid foundation of basic research for much better
treatments in the future.'

Joe Korner, of the Stroke Association, said: 'This research is another step towards using stem cell therapy in treating and reversing the brain damage caused by stroke. 

'It is exciting because researchers have shown they are able to overcome some of the many challenges in translating the potential of using stem cells into reality.
'Every five minutes someone in the UK has a stroke and it is vital that we do all we can to help those affected by stroke.'
Professor Anthony Hollander,  a stem cell expert at the University of Bristol, said: 'We are only just beginning to understand how to use tissue engineering to cure diseases.  
'This study shows the exciting possibility of using a biomaterial to deliver stem cells to a very specific location in the brain.  

'It is too early to say if it will be clinically effective in patients but the more we explore 
these possibilities the more likely it is that we will develop successful therapies.'

Stroke is the third most common cause of death in Britain, after heart disease and cancer.

It affects 150,000 a year, kills more than 67,000 and causes more disability than any other chronic disease.
